Project Gutenberg's A Journey to the Interior of the Earth, by Jules Verne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Journey to the Interior of the Earth

Author: Jules Verne

Posting Date: December 3, 2010 [EBook #3748]
Release Date: February, 2003
[Last updated: August 19, 2011]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOURNEY TO THE INTERIOR ***




Produced by Norman M. Wolcott.








               A Journey into the Interior of the Earth

                            by Jules Verne



[Redactor's Note: The following version of Jules Verne's "Journey
into the Interior of the Earth" was published by Ward, Lock, &Co.,
Ltd., London, in 1877. This version is believed to be the most
faithful rendition into English of this classic currently in the
public domain. The few notes of the translator are located near the
point where they are referenced. The Runic characters in Chapter III
are visible in the HTML version of the text. The character set is
ISO-8891-1, mainly the Windows character set. The translation is by
Frederick Amadeus Malleson.

While the translation is fairly literal, and Malleson (a clergyman)
has taken pains with the scientific portions of the work and added
the chapter headings, he has made some unfortunate emendations mainly
concerning biblical references, and has added a few 'improvements' of
his own, which are detailed below:

III. "_pertubata seu inordinata,_" as Euclid has it."

XXX. cry, "Thalatta! thalatta!" the sea! the sea! The deeply indented
shore was lined with a breadth of fine shining sand, softly

XXXII. hippopotamus. {as if the creator, pressed for time in the
first hours of the world, had assembled several animals into one.}
The colossal mastodon

XXXII. I return to the scriptural periods or ages of the world,
conventionally called 'days,' long before the appearance of man when
the unfinished world was as yet unfitted for his support. {I return
to the biblical epochs of the creation, well in advance of the birth
of man, when the incomplete earth was not yet sufficient for him.}

XXXVIII. (footnote), and which is illustrated in the negro
countenance and in the lowest savages.

XXXIX. of the geologic period. {antediluvian}

(These corrections have kindly been pointed out by Christian Snchez
<chvsanchez@arnet.com.ar> of the Jules Verne Forum.)]

----------------------------------------------------------------------

                              A JOURNEY

                               INTO THE

                        INTERIOR OF THE EARTH

                                  by

                              Jules Verne

----------------------------------------------------------------------




PREFACE


THE "Voyages Extraordinaires" of M. Jules Verne deserve to be made
widely known in English-speaking countries by means of carefully
prepared translations. Witty and ingenious adaptations of the
researches and discoveries of modern science to the popular taste,
which demands that these should be presented to ordinary readers in
the lighter form of cleverly mingled truth and fiction, these books
will assuredly be read with profit and delight, especially by English
youth. Certainly no writer before M. Jules Verne has been so happy in
weaving together in judicious combination severe scientific truth
with a charming exercise of playful imagination.

Iceland, the starting point of the marvellous underground journey
imagined in this volume, is invested at the present time with a
painful interest in consequence of the disastrous eruptions last
Easter Day, which covered with lava and ashes the poor and scanty
vegetation upon which four thousand persons were partly dependent for
the means of subsistence. For a long time to come the natives of that
interesting island, who cleave to their desert home with all that
_amor patriae_ which is so much more easily understood than
explained, will look, and look not in vain, for the help of those on
whom fall the smiles of a kindlier sun in regions not torn by
earthquakes nor blasted and ravaged by volcanic fires. Will the
readers of this little book, who, are gifted with the means of
indulging in the luxury of extended beneficence, remember the
distress of their brethren in the far north, whom distance has not
barred from the claim of being counted our "neighbours"? And whatever
their humane feelings may prompt them to bestow will be gladly added
to the Mansion-House Iceland Relief Fund.

In his desire to ascertain how far the picture of Iceland, drawn in
the work of Jules Verne is a correct one, the translator hopes in the
course of a mail or two to receive a communication from a leading man
of science in the island, which may furnish matter for additional
information in a future edition.

The scientific portion of the French original is not without a few
errors, which the translator, with the kind assistance of Mr. Cameron
of H. M. Geological Survey, has ventured to point out and correct. It
is scarcely to be expected in a work in which the element of
amusement is intended to enter more largely than that of scientific
instruction, that any great degree of accuracy should be arrived at.
Yet the translator hopes that what trifling deviations from the text
or corrections in foot notes he is responsible for, will have done a
little towards the increased usefulness of the work.

F. A. M.

The Vicarage,

     Broughton-in-Furness

----------------------------------------------------------------------




                   CONTENTS


     I       THE PROFESSOR AND HIS FAMILY
     II      A MYSTERY TO BE SOLVED AT ANY PRICE
     III     THE RUNIC WRITING EXERCISES THE PROFESSOR
     IV      THE ENEMY TO BE STARVED INTO SUBMISSION
     V       FAMINE, THEN VICTORY, FOLLOWED BY DISMAY
     VI      EXCITING DISCUSSIONS ABOUT AN UNPARALLELED EXERCISE
     VII     A WOMAN'S COURAGE
     VIII    SERIOUS PREPARATIONS FOR VERTICAL DESCENT
     IX      ICELAND, BUT WHAT NEXT?
     X       INTERESTING CONVERSATIONS WITH ICELANDIC SAVANTS
     XI      A GUIDE FOUND TO THE CENTRE OF THE EARTH
     XII     A BARREN LAND
     XIII    HOSPITALITY UNDER THE ARCTIC CIRCLE
     XIV     BUT ARCTICS CAN BE INHOSPITABLE, TOO
     XV      SNFFEL AT LAST
     XVI     BOLDLY DOWN THE CRATER
     XVII    VERTICAL DESCENT
     XVIII   THE WONDERS OF TERRESTIAL DEPTHS
     XIX     GEOLOGICAL STUDIES IN SITU
     XX      THE FIRST SIGNS OF DISTRESS
     XXI     COMPASSION FUSES THE PROFESSOR'S HEART
     XXII    TOTAL FAILURE OF WATER
     XXIII   WATER DISCOVERED
     XXIV    WELL SAID, OLD MOLE! CANST THOU WORK
             IN THE GROUND SO FAST?
     XXV     DE PROFUNDIS
     XXVI    THE WORST PERIL OF ALL
     XXVII   LOST IN THE BOWELS OF THE EARTH
     XXVIII  THE RESCUE IN THE WHISPERING GALLERY
     XXIX    THALATTA! THALATTA!
     XXX     A NEW MARE INTERNUM
     XXXI    PREPARATIONS FOR A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY
     XXXII   WONDERS OF THE DEEP
     XXXIII  A BATTLE OF MONSTERS
     XXXIV   THE GREAT GEYSER
     XXXV    AN ELECTRIC STORM
     XXXVI   CALM PHILOSOPHIC DISCUSSIONS
     XXXVII  THE LIEDENBROCK MUSEUM OF GEOLOGY
     XXXVIII THE PROFESSOR IN HIS CHAIR AGAIN
     XXXIX   FOREST SCENERY ILLUMINATED BY ELECTRICITY
     XL      PREPARATIONS FOR BLASTING A PASSAGE
             TO THE CENTRE OF THE EARTH
     XLI     THE GREAT EXPLOSION AND THE RUSH DOWN BELOW
     XLII    HEADLONG SPEED UPWARD THROUGH THE HORRORS OF DARKNESS
     XLIII   SHOT OUT OF A VOLCANO AT LAST!
     XLIV    SUNNY LANDS IN THE BLUE MEDITERRANEAN
     XLV     ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL

----------------------------------------------------------------------




A JOURNEY INTO THE INTERIOR OF THE EARTH




CHAPTER I.

THE PROFESSOR AND HIS FAMILY


On the 24th of May, 1863, my uncle, Professor Liedenbrock, rushed
into his little house, No. 19 Knigstrasse, one of the oldest streets
in the oldest portion of the city of Hamburg.

Martha must have concluded that she was very much behindhand, for the
dinner had only just been put into the oven.

"Well, now," said I to myself, "if that most impatient of men is
hungry, what a disturbance he will make!"

"M. Liedenbrock so soon!" cried poor Martha in great alarm, half
opening the dining-room door.

"Yes, Martha; but very likely the dinner is not half cooked, for it
is not two yet. Saint Michael's clock has only just struck half-past
one."

"Then why has the master come home so soon?"

"Perhaps he will tell us that himself."

"Here he is, Monsieur Axel; I will run and hide myself while you
argue with him."

And Martha retreated in safety into her own dominions.

I was left alone. But how was it possible for a man of my undecided
turn of mind to argue successfully with so irascible a person as the
Professor? With this persuasion I was hurrying away to my own little
retreat upstairs, when the street door creaked upon its hinges; heavy
feet made the whole flight of stairs to shake; and the master of the
house, passing rapidly through the dining-room, threw himself in
haste into his own sanctum.

But on his rapid way he had found time to fling his hazel stick into
a corner, his rough broadbrim upon the table, and these few emphatic
words at his nephew:

"Axel, follow me!"

I had scarcely had time to move when the Professor was again shouting
after me:

"What! not come yet?"

And I rushed into my redoubtable master's study.

Otto Liedenbrock had no mischief in him, I willingly allow that; but
unless he very considerably changes as he grows older, at the end he
will be a most original character.

He was professor at the Johannum, and was delivering a series of
lectures on mineralogy, in the course of every one of which he broke
into a passion once or twice at least. Not at all that he was
over-anxious about the improvement of his class, or about the degree
of attention with which they listened to him, or the success which
might eventually crown his labours. Such little matters of detail
never troubled him much. His teaching was as the German philosophy
calls it, 'subjective'; it was to benefit himself, not others. He was
a learned egotist. He was a well of science, and the pulleys worked
uneasily when you wanted to draw anything out of it. In a word, he
was a learned miser.

Germany has not a few professors of this sort.

To his misfortune, my uncle was not gifted with a sufficiently rapid
utterance; not, to be sure, when he was talking at home, but
certainly in his public delivery; this is a want much to be deplored
in a speaker. The fact is, that during the course of his lectures at
the Johannum, the Professor often came to a complete standstill; he
fought with wilful words that refused to pass his struggling lips,
such words as resist and distend the cheeks, and at last break out
into the unasked-for shape of a round and most unscientific oath:
then his fury would gradually abate.

Now in mineralogy there are many half-Greek and half-Latin terms,
very hard to articulate, and which would be most trying to a poet's
measures. I don't wish to say a word against so respectable a
science, far be that from me. True, in the august presence of
rhombohedral crystals, retinasphaltic resins, gehlenites, Fassaites,
molybdenites, tungstates of manganese, and titanite of zirconium,
why, the most facile of tongues may make a slip now and then.

It therefore happened that this venial fault of my uncle's came to be
pretty well understood in time, and an unfair advantage was taken of
it; the students laid wait for him in dangerous places, and when he
began to stumble, loud was the laughter, which is not in good taste,
not even in Germans. And if there was always a full audience to
honour the Liedenbrock courses, I should be sorry to conjecture how
many came to make merry at my uncle's expense.

Nevertheless my good uncle was a man of deep learning--a fact I am
most anxious to assert and reassert. Sometimes he might irretrievably
injure a specimen by his too great ardour in handling it; but still
he united the genius of a true geologist with the keen eye of the
mineralogist. Armed with his hammer, his steel pointer, his magnetic
needles, his blowpipe, and his bottle of nitric acid, he was a
powerful man of science. He would refer any mineral to its proper
place among the six hundred [1] elementary substances now enumerated,
by its fracture, its appearance, its hardness, its fusibility, its
sonorousness, its smell, and its taste.

The name of Liedenbrock was honourably mentioned in colleges and
learned societies. Humphry Davy, [2] Humboldt, Captain Sir John
Franklin, General Sabine, never failed to call upon him on their way
through Hamburg. Becquerel, Ebelman, Brewster, Dumas, Milne-Edwards,
Saint-Claire-Deville frequently consulted him upon the most difficult
problems in chemistry, a science which was indebted to him for
considerable discoveries, for in 1853 there had appeared at Leipzig
an imposing folio by Otto Liedenbrock, entitled, "A Treatise upon
Transcendental Chemistry," with plates; a work, however, which failed
to cover its expenses.

To all these titles to honour let me add that my uncle was the
curator of the museum of mineralogy formed by M. Struve, the Russian
ambassador; a most valuable collection, the fame of which is European.

Such was the gentleman who addressed me in that impetuous manner.
Fancy a tall, spare man, of an iron constitution, and with a fair
complexion which took off a good ten years from the fifty he must own
to. His restless eyes were in incessant motion behind his full-sized
spectacles. His long, thin nose was like a knife blade. Boys have
been heard to remark that that organ was magnetised and attracted
iron filings. But this was merely a mischievous report; it had no
attraction except for snuff, which it seemed to draw to itself in
great quantities.

When I have added, to complete my portrait, that my uncle walked by
mathematical strides of a yard and a half, and that in walking he
kept his fists firmly closed, a sure sign of an irritable
temperament, I think I shall have said enough to disenchant any one
who should by mistake have coveted much of his company.

He lived in his own little house in Knigstrasse, a structure half
brick and half wood, with a gable cut into steps; it looked upon one
of those winding canals which intersect each other in the middle of
the ancient quarter of Hamburg, and which the great fire of 1842 had
fortunately spared.

[1] Sixty-three. (Tr.)

[2] As Sir Humphry Davy died in 1829, the translator must be pardoned
for pointing out here an anachronism, unless we are to assume that
the learned Professor's celebrity dawned in his earliest years. (Tr.)

It is true that the old house stood slightly off the perpendicular,
and bulged out a little towards the street; its roof sloped a little
to one side, like the cap over the left ear of a Tugendbund student;
its lines wanted accuracy; but after all, it stood firm, thanks to an
old elm which buttressed it in front, and which often in spring sent
its young sprays through the window panes.

My uncle was tolerably well off for a German professor. The house was
his own, and everything in it. The living contents were his
god-daughter Gruben, a young Virlandaise of seventeen, Martha, and
myself. As his nephew and an orphan, I became his laboratory
assistant.

I freely confess that I was exceedingly fond of geology and all its
kindred sciences; the blood of a mineralogist was in my veins, and in
the midst of my specimens I was always happy.

In a word, a man might live happily enough in the little old house in
the Knigstrasse, in spite of the restless impatience of its master,
for although he was a little too excitable--he was very fond of me.
But the man had no notion how to wait; nature herself was too slow
for him. In April, after he had planted in the terra-cotta pots
outside his window seedling plants of mignonette and convolvulus, he
would go and give them a little pull by their leaves to make them
grow faster. In dealing with such a strange individual there was
nothing for it but prompt obedience. I therefore rushed after him.




CHAPTER II.

A MYSTERY TO BE SOLVED AT ANY PRICE


That study of his was a museum, and nothing else. Specimens of
everything known in mineralogy lay there in their places in perfect
order, and correctly named, divided into inflammable, metallic, and
lithoid minerals.

How well I knew all these bits of science! Many a time, instead of
enjoying the company of lads of my own age, I had preferred dusting
these graphites, anthracites, coals, lignites, and peats! And there
were bitumens, resins, organic salts, to be protected from the least
grain of dust; and metals, from iron to gold, metals whose current
value altogether disappeared in the presence of the republican
equality of scientific specimens; and stones too, enough to rebuild
entirely the house in Knigstrasse, even with a handsome additional
room, which would have suited me admirably.

But on entering this study now I thought of none of all these
wonders; my uncle alone filled my thoughts. He had thrown himself
into a velvet easy-chair, and was grasping between his hands a book
over which he bent, pondering with intense admiration.

"Here's a remarkable book! What a wonderful book!" he was exclaiming.

These ejaculations brought to my mind the fact that my uncle was
liable to occasional fits of bibliomania; but no old book had any
value in his eyes unless it had the virtue of being nowhere else to
be found, or, at any rate, of being illegible.

"Well, now; don't you see it yet? Why I have got a priceless
treasure, that I found his morning, in rummaging in old Hevelius's
shop, the Jew."

"Magnificent!" I replied, with a good imitation of enthusiasm.

What was the good of all this fuss about an old quarto, bound in
rough calf, a yellow, faded volume, with a ragged seal depending from
it?

But for all that there was no lull yet in the admiring exclamations
of the Professor.

"See," he went on, both asking the questions and supplying the
answers. "Isn't it a beauty? Yes; splendid! Did you ever see such a
binding? Doesn't the book open easily? Yes; it stops open anywhere.
But does it shut equally well? Yes; for the binding and the leaves
are flush, all in a straight line, and no gaps or openings anywhere.
And look at its back, after seven hundred years. Why, Bozerian,
Closs, or Purgold might have been proud of such a binding!"

While rapidly making these comments my uncle kept opening and
shutting the old tome. I really could do no less than ask a question
about its contents, although I did not feel the slightest interest.

"And what is the title of this marvellous work?" I asked with an
affected eagerness which he must have been very blind not to see
through.

"This work," replied my uncle, firing up with renewed enthusiasm,
"this work is the Heims Kringla of Snorre Turlleson, the most famous
Icelandic author of the twelfth century! It is the chronicle of the
Norwegian princes who ruled in Iceland."

"Indeed;" I cried, keeping up wonderfully, "of course it is a German
translation?"

"What!" sharply replied the Professor, "a translation! What should I
do with a translation? This _is_ the Icelandic original, in the
magnificent idiomatic vernacular, which is both rich and simple, and
admits of an infinite variety of grammatical combinations and verbal
modifications."

"Like German." I happily ventured.

"Yes," replied my uncle, shrugging his shoulders; "but, in addition
to all this, the Icelandic has three numbers like the Greek, and
irregular declensions of nouns proper like the Latin."

"Ah!" said I, a little moved out of my indifference; "and is the type
good?"

"Type! What do you mean by talking of type, wretched Axel? Type! Do
you take it for a printed book, you ignorant fool? It is a
manuscript, a Runic manuscript."

"Runic?"

"Yes. Do you want me to explain what that is?"

"Of course not," I replied in the tone of an injured man. But my
uncle persevered, and told me, against my will, of many things I
cared nothing about.

"Runic characters were in use in Iceland in former ages. They were
invented, it is said, by Odin himself. Look there, and wonder,
impious young man, and admire these letters, the invention of the
Scandinavian god!"

Well, well! not knowing what to say, I was going to prostrate myself
before this wonderful book, a way of answering equally pleasing to
gods and kings, and which has the advantage of never giving them any
embarrassment, when a little incident happened to divert conversation
into another channel.

This was the appearance of a dirty slip of parchment, which slipped
out of the volume and fell upon the floor.

My uncle pounced upon this shred with incredible avidity. An old
document, enclosed an immemorial time within the folds of this old
book, had for him an immeasurable value.

"What's this?" he cried.

And he laid out upon the table a piece of parchment, five inches by
three, and along which were traced certain mysterious characters.

Here is the exact facsimile. I think it important to let these
strange signs be publicly known, for they were the means of drawing
on Professor Liedenbrock and his nephew to undertake the most
wonderful expedition of the nineteenth century.

[Runic glyphs occur here]

The Professor mused a few moments over this series of characters;
then raising his spectacles he pronounced:

"These are Runic letters; they are exactly like those of the
manuscript of Snorre Turlleson. But, what on earth is their meaning?"

Runic letters appearing to my mind to be an invention of the learned
to mystify this poor world, I was not sorry to see my uncle suffering
the pangs of mystification. At least, so it seemed to me, judging
from his fingers, which were beginning to work with terrible energy.

"It is certainly old Icelandic," he muttered between his teeth.

And Professor Liedenbrock must have known, for he was acknowledged to
be quite a polyglot. Not that he could speak fluently in the two
thousand languages and twelve thousand dialects which are spoken on
the earth, but he knew at least his share of them.

So he was going, in the presence of this difficulty, to give way to
all the impetuosity of his character, and I was preparing for a
violent outbreak, when two o'clock struck by the little timepiece
over the fireplace.

At that moment our good housekeeper Martha opened the study door,
saying:

"Dinner is ready!"

I am afraid he sent that soup to where it would boil away to nothing,
and Martha took to her heels for safety. I followed her, and hardly
knowing how I got there I found myself seated in my usual place.

I waited a few minutes. No Professor came. Never within my
remembrance had he missed the important ceremonial of dinner. And yet
what a good dinner it was! There was parsley soup, an omelette of ham
garnished with spiced sorrel, a fillet of veal with compote of
prunes; for dessert, crystallised fruit; the whole washed down with
sweet Moselle.

All this my uncle was going to sacrifice to a bit of old parchment.
As an affectionate and attentive nephew I considered it my duty to
eat for him as well as for myself, which I did conscientiously.

"I have never known such a thing," said Martha. "M. Liedenbrock is
not at table!"

"Who could have believed it?" I said, with my mouth full.

"Something serious is going to happen," said the servant, shaking her
head.

My opinion was, that nothing more serious would happen than an awful
scene when my uncle should have discovered that his dinner was
devoured. I had come to the last of the fruit when a very loud voice
tore me away from the pleasures of my dessert. With one spring I
bounded out of the dining-room into the study.




CHAPTER III.

THE RUNIC WRITING EXERCISES THE PROFESSOR


"Undoubtedly it is Runic," said the Professor, bending his brows;
"but there is a secret in it, and I mean to discover the key."

A violent gesture finished the sentence.

"Sit there," he added, holding out his fist towards the table. "Sit
there, and write."

I was seated in a trice.

"Now I will dictate to you every letter of our alphabet which
corresponds with each of these Icelandic characters. We will see what
that will give us. But, by St. Michael, if you should dare to deceive
me--"

The dictation commenced. I did my best. Every letter was given me one
after the other, with the following remarkable result:

     mm.rnlls  esrevel  seecIde
     sgtssmf   vnteief  niedrke
     kt,samn   atrateS  saodrrn
     emtnaeI   nvaect   rrilSa
     Atsaar    .nvcrc   ieaabs
     ccrmi     eevtVl   frAntv
     dt,iac    oseibo   KediiI

[Redactor: In the original version the initial letter is an 'm' with
a superscore over it. It is my supposition that this is the
translator's way of writing 'mm' and I have replaced it accordingly,
since our typography does not allow such a character.]

When this work was ended my uncle tore the paper from me and examined
it attentively for a long time.

"What does it all mean?" he kept repeating mechanically.

Upon my honour I could not have enlightened him. Besides he did not
ask me, and he went on talking to himself.

"This is what is called a cryptogram, or cipher," he said, "in which
letters are purposely thrown in confusion, which if properly arranged
would reveal their sense. Only think that under this jargon there may
lie concealed the clue to some great discovery!"

As for me, I was of opinion that there was nothing at all, in it;
though, of course, I took care not to say so.

Then the Professor took the book and the parchment, and diligently
compared them together.

"These two writings are not by the same hand," he said; "the cipher
is of later date than the book, an undoubted proof of which I see in
a moment. The first letter is a double m, a letter which is not to be
found in Turlleson's book, and which was only added to the alphabet
in the fourteenth century. Therefore there are two hundred years
between the manuscript and the document."

I admitted that this was a strictly logical conclusion.

"I am therefore led to imagine," continued my uncle, "that some
possessor of this book wrote these mysterious letters. But who was
that possessor? Is his name nowhere to be found in the manuscript?"

My uncle raised his spectacles, took up a strong lens, and carefully
examined the blank pages of the book. On the front of the second, the
title-page, he noticed a sort of stain which looked like an ink blot.
But in looking at it very closely he thought he could distinguish
some half-effaced letters. My uncle at once fastened upon this as the
centre of interest, and he laboured at that blot, until by the help
of his microscope he ended by making out the following Runic
characters which he read without difficulty.

"Arne Saknussemm!" he cried in triumph. "Why that is the name of
another Icelander, a savant of the sixteenth century, a celebrated
alchemist!"

I gazed at my uncle with satisfactory admiration.

"Those alchemists," he resumed, "Avicenna, Bacon, Lully, Paracelsus,
were the real and only savants of their time. They made discoveries
at which we are astonished. Has not this Saknussemm concealed under
his cryptogram some surprising invention? It is so; it must be so!"

The Professor's imagination took fire at this hypothesis.

"No doubt," I ventured to reply, "but what interest would he have in
thus hiding so marvellous a discovery?"

"Why? Why? How can I tell? Did not Galileo do the same by Saturn? We
shall see. I will get at the secret of this document, and I will
neither sleep nor eat until I have found it out."

My comment on this was a half-suppressed "Oh!"

"Nor you either, Axel," he added.

"The deuce!" said I to myself; "then it is lucky I have eaten two
dinners to-day!"

"First of all we must find out the key to this cipher; that cannot be
difficult."

At these words I quickly raised my head; but my uncle went on
soliloquising.

"There's nothing easier. In this document there are a hundred and
thirty-two letters, viz., seventy-seven consonants and fifty-five
vowels. This is the proportion found in southern languages, whilst
northern tongues are much richer in consonants; therefore this is in
a southern language."

These were very fair conclusions, I thought.

"But what language is it?"

Here I looked for a display of learning, but I met instead with
profound analysis.

"This Saknussemm," he went on, "was a very well-informed man; now
since he was not writing in his own mother tongue, he would naturally
select that which was currently adopted by the choice spirits of the
sixteenth century; I mean Latin. If I am mistaken, I can but try
Spanish, French, Italian, Greek, or Hebrew. But the savants of the
sixteenth century generally wrote in Latin. I am therefore entitled
to pronounce this,  priori, to be Latin. It is Latin."

I jumped up in my chair. My Latin memories rose in revolt against the
notion that these barbarous words could belong to the sweet language
of Virgil.

"Yes, it is Latin," my uncle went on; "but it is Latin confused and
in disorder; "_pertubata seu inordinata,_" as Euclid has it."

"Very well," thought I, "if you can bring order out of that
confusion, my dear uncle, you are a clever man."

"Let us examine carefully," said he again, taking up the leaf upon
which I had written. "Here is a series of one hundred and thirty-two
letters in apparent disorder. There are words consisting of
consonants only, as _nrrlls;_ others, on the other hand, in which
vowels predominate, as for instance the fifth, _uneeief,_ or the last
but one, _oseibo_. Now this arrangement has evidently not been
premeditated; it has arisen mathematically in obedience to the
unknown law which has ruled in the succession of these letters. It
appears to me a certainty that the original sentence was written in a
proper manner, and afterwards distorted by a law which we have yet to
discover. Whoever possesses the key of this cipher will read it with
fluency. What is that key? Axel, have you got it?"

I answered not a word, and for a very good reason. My eyes had fallen
upon a charming picture, suspended against the wall, the portrait of
Gruben. My uncle's ward was at that time at Altona, staying with a
relation, and in her absence I was very downhearted; for I may
confess it to you now, the pretty Virlandaise and the professor's
nephew loved each other with a patience and a calmness entirely
German. We had become engaged unknown to my uncle, who was too much
taken up with geology to be able to enter into such feelings as ours.
Gruben was a lovely blue-eyed blonde, rather given to gravity and
seriousness; but that did not prevent her from loving me very
sincerely. As for me, I adored her, if there is such a word in the
German language. Thus it happened that the picture of my pretty
Virlandaise threw me in a moment out of the world of realities into
that of memory and fancy.

There looked down upon me the faithful companion of my labours and my
recreations. Every day she helped me to arrange my uncle's precious
specimens; she and I labelled them together. Mademoiselle Gruben was
an accomplished mineralogist; she could have taught a few things to a
savant. She was fond of investigating abstruse scientific questions.
What pleasant hours we have spent in study; and how often I envied
the very stones which she handled with her charming fingers.

Then, when our leisure hours came, we used to go out together and
turn into the shady avenues by the Alster, and went happily side by
side up to the old windmill, which forms such an improvement to the
landscape at the head of the lake. On the road we chatted hand in
hand; I told her amusing tales at which she laughed heartily. Then we
reached the banks of the Elbe, and after having bid good-bye to the
swan, sailing gracefully amidst the white water lilies, we returned
to the quay by the steamer.

That is just where I was in my dream, when my uncle with a vehement
thump on the table dragged me back to the realities of life.

"Come," said he, "the very first idea which would come into any one's
head to confuse the letters of a sentence would be to write the words
vertically instead of horizontally."

"Indeed!" said I.

"Now we must see what would be the effect of that, Axel; put down
upon this paper any sentence you like, only instead of arranging the
letters in the usual way, one after the other, place them in
succession in vertical columns, so as to group them together in five
or six vertical lines."

I caught his meaning, and immediately produced the following literary
wonder:

     I       y       l       o       a       u
     l       o       l       w       r       b
     o       u       ,       n       G       e
     v       w       m       d       r       n
     e       e       y       e       a       !

"Good," said the professor, without reading them, "now set down those
words in a horizontal line."

I obeyed, and with this result:

     Iyloau lolwrb ou,nGe vwmdrn eeyea!

"Excellent!" said my uncle, taking the paper hastily out of my hands.
"This begins to look just like an ancient document: the vowels and
the consonants are grouped together in equal disorder; there are even
capitals in the middle of words, and commas too, just as in
Saknussemm's parchment."

I considered these remarks very clever.

"Now," said my uncle, looking straight at me, "to read the sentence
which you have just written, and with which I am wholly unacquainted,
I shall only have to take the first letter of each word, then the
second, the third, and so forth."

And my uncle, to his great astonishment, and my much greater, read:

     "I love you well, my own dear Gruben!"

"Hallo!" cried the Professor.

Yes, indeed, without knowing what I was about, like an awkward and
unlucky lover, I had compromised myself by writing this unfortunate
sentence.

"Aha! you are in love with Gruben?" he said, with the right look for
a guardian.

"Yes; no!" I stammered.

"You love Gruben," he went on once or twice dreamily. "Well, let us
apply the process I have suggested to the document in question."

My uncle, falling back into his absorbing contemplations, had already
forgotten my imprudent words. I merely say imprudent, for the great
mind of so learned a man of course had no place for love affairs, and
happily the grand business of the document gained me the victory.

Just as the moment of the supreme experiment arrived the Professor's
eyes flashed right through his spectacles. There was a quivering in
his fingers as he grasped the old parchment. He was deeply moved. At
last he gave a preliminary cough, and with profound gravity, naming
in succession the first, then the second letter of each word, he
dictated me the following:

     mmessvnkaSenrA.icefdoK.segnittamvrtn
     ecertserrette,rotaisadva,ednecsedsadne
     lacartniiilvIsiratracSarbmvtabiledmek
     meretarcsilvcoIsleffenSnI.

I confess I felt considerably excited in coming to the end; these
letters named, one at a time, had carried no sense to my mind; I
therefore waited for the Professor with great pomp to unfold the
magnificent but hidden Latin of this mysterious phrase.

But who could have foretold the result? A violent thump made the
furniture rattle, and spilt some ink, and my pen dropped from between
my fingers.

"That's not it," cried my uncle, "there's no sense in it."

Then darting out like a shot, bowling down stairs like an avalanche,
he rushed into the Knigstrasse and fled.




CHAPTER IV.

THE ENEMY TO BE STARVED INTO SUBMISSION


"He is gone!" cried Martha, running out of her kitchen at the noise
of the violent slamming of doors.

"Yes," I replied, "completely gone."

"Well; and how about his dinner?" said the old servant.

"He won't have any."

"And his supper?"

"He won't have any."

"What?" cried Martha, with clasped hands.

"No, my dear Martha, he will eat no more. No one in the house is to
eat anything at all. Uncle Liedenbrock is going to make us all fast
until he has succeeded in deciphering an undecipherable scrawl."

"Oh, my dear! must we then all die of hunger?"

I hardly dared to confess that, with so absolute a ruler as my uncle,
this fate was inevitable.

The old servant, visibly moved, returned to the kitchen, moaning
piteously.

When I was alone, I thought I would go and tell Gruben all about it.
But how should I be able to escape from the house? The Professor
might return at any moment. And suppose he called me? And suppose he
tackled me again with this logomachy, which might vainly have been
set before ancient Oedipus. And if I did not obey his call, who could
answer for what might happen?

The wisest course was to remain where I was. A mineralogist at
Besanon had just sent us a collection of siliceous nodules, which I
had to classify: so I set to work; I sorted, labelled, and arranged
in their own glass case all these hollow specimens, in the cavity of
each of which was a nest of little crystals.

But this work did not succeed in absorbing all my attention. That old
document kept working in my brain. My head throbbed with excitement,
and I felt an undefined uneasiness. I was possessed with a
presentiment of coming evil.

In an hour my nodules were all arranged upon successive shelves. Then
I dropped down into the old velvet armchair, my head thrown back and
my hands joined over it. I lighted my long crooked pipe, with a
painting on it of an idle-looking naiad; then I amused myself
watching the process of the conversion of the tobacco into carbon,
which was by slow degrees making my naiad into a negress. Now and
then I listened to hear whether a well-known step was on the stairs.
No. Where could my uncle be at that moment? I fancied him running
under the noble trees which line the road to Altona, gesticulating,
making shots with his cane, thrashing the long grass, cutting the
heads off the thistles, and disturbing the contemplative storks in
their peaceful solitude.

Would he return in triumph or in discouragement? Which would get the
upper hand, he or the secret? I was thus asking myself questions, and
mechanically taking between my fingers the sheet of paper
mysteriously disfigured with the incomprehensible succession of
letters I had written down; and I repeated to myself "What does it
all mean?"

I sought to group the letters so as to form words. Quite impossible!
When I put them together by twos, threes, fives or sixes, nothing
came of it but nonsense. To be sure the fourteenth, fifteenth and
sixteenth letters made the English word 'ice'; the eighty-third and
two following made 'sir'; and in the midst of the document, in the
second and third lines, I observed the words, "rots," "mutabile,"
"ira," "net," "atra."

"Come now," I thought, "these words seem to justify my uncle's view
about the language of the document. In the fourth line appeared the
word "luco", which means a sacred wood. It is true that in the third
line was the word "tabiled", which looked like Hebrew, and in the
last the purely French words "mer", "arc", "mere.""

All this was enough to drive a poor fellow crazy. Four different
languages in this ridiculous sentence! What connection could there
possibly be between such words as ice, sir, anger, cruel, sacred
wood, changeable, mother, bow, and sea? The first and the last might
have something to do with each other; it was not at all surprising
that in a document written in Iceland there should be mention of a
sea of ice; but it was quite another thing to get to the end of this
cryptogram with so small a clue. So I was struggling with an
insurmountable difficulty; my brain got heated, my eyes watered over
that sheet of paper; its hundred and thirty-two letters seemed to
flutter and fly around me like those motes of mingled light and
darkness which float in the air around the head when the blood is
rushing upwards with undue violence. I was a prey to a kind of
hallucination; I was stifling; I wanted air. Unconsciously I fanned
myself with the bit of paper, the back and front of which
successively came before my eyes. What was my surprise when, in one
of those rapid revolutions, at the moment when the back was turned to
me I thought I caught sight of the Latin words "craterem,"
"terrestre," and others.

A sudden light burst in upon me; these hints alone gave me the first
glimpse of the truth; I had discovered the key to the cipher. To read
the document, it would not even be necessary to read it through the
paper. Such as it was, just such as it had been dictated to me, so it
might be spelt out with ease. All those ingenious professorial
combinations were coming right. He was right as to the arrangement of
the letters; he was right as to the language. He had been within a
hair's breadth of reading this Latin document from end to end; but
that hair's breadth, chance had given it to me!

You may be sure I felt stirred up. My eyes were dim, I could scarcely
see. I had laid the paper upon the table. At a glance I could tell
the whole secret.

At last I became more calm. I made a wise resolve to walk twice round
the room quietly and settle my nerves, and then I returned into the
deep gulf of the huge armchair.

"Now I'll read it," I cried, after having well distended my lungs
with air.

I leaned over the table; I laid my finger successively upon every
letter; and without a pause, without one moment's hesitation, I read
off the whole sentence aloud.

Stupefaction! terror! I sat overwhelmed as if with a sudden deadly
blow. What! that which I read had actually, really been done! A
mortal man had had the audacity to penetrate! . . .

"Ah!" I cried, springing up. "But no! no! My uncle shall never know
it. He would insist upon doing it too. He would want to know all
about it. Ropes could not hold him, such a determined geologist as he
is! He would start, he would, in spite of everything and everybody,
and he would take me with him, and we should never get back. No,
never! never!"

My over-excitement was beyond all description.

"No! no! it shall not be," I declared energetically; "and as it is in
my power to prevent the knowledge of it coming into the mind of my
tyrant, I will do it. By dint of turning this document round and
round, he too might discover the key. I will destroy it."

There was a little fire left on the hearth. I seized not only the
paper but Saknussemm's parchment; with a feverish hand I was about to
fling it all upon the coals and utterly destroy and abolish this
dangerous secret, when the study door opened, and my uncle appeared.




CHAPTER V.

FAMINE, THEN VICTORY, FOLLOWED BY DISMAY


I had only just time to replace the unfortunate document upon the
table.

Professor Liedenbrock seemed to be greatly abstracted.

The ruling thought gave him no rest. Evidently he had gone deeply
into the matter, analytically and with profound scrutiny. He had
brought all the resources of his mind to bear upon it during his
walk, and he had come back to apply some new combination.

He sat in his armchair, and pen in hand he began what looked very
much like algebraic formula: I followed with my eyes his trembling
hands, I took count of every movement. Might not some unhoped-for
result come of it? I trembled, too, very unnecessarily, since the
true key was in my hands, and no other would open the secret.

For three long hours my uncle worked on without a word, without
lifting his head; rubbing out, beginning again, then rubbing out
again, and so on a hundred times.

I knew very well that if he succeeded in setting down these letters
in every possible relative position, the sentence would come out. But
I knew also that twenty letters alone could form two quintillions,
four hundred and thirty-two quadrillions, nine hundred and two
trillions, eight billions, a hundred and seventy-six millions, six
hundred and forty thousand combinations. Now, here were a hundred and
thirty-two letters in this sentence, and these hundred and thirty-two
letters would give a number of different sentences, each made up of
at least a hundred and thirty-three figures, a number which passed
far beyond all calculation or conception.

So I felt reassured as far as regarded this heroic method of solving
the difficulty.

But time was passing away; night came on; the street noises ceased;
my uncle, bending over his task, noticed nothing, not even Martha
half opening the door; he heard not a sound, not even that excellent
woman saying:

"Will not monsieur take any supper to-night?"

And poor Martha had to go away unanswered. As for me, after long
resistance, I was overcome by sleep, and fell off at the end of the
sofa, while uncle Liedenbrock went on calculating and rubbing out his
calculations.

When I awoke next morning that indefatigable worker was still at his
post. His red eyes, his pale complexion, his hair tangled between his
feverish fingers, the red spots on his cheeks, revealed his desperate
struggle with impossibilities, and the weariness of spirit, the
mental wrestlings he must have undergone all through that unhappy
night.

To tell the plain truth, I pitied him. In spite of the reproaches
which I considered I had a right to lay upon him, a certain feeling
of compassion was beginning to gain upon me. The poor man was so
entirely taken up with his one idea that he had even forgotten how to
get angry. All the strength of his feelings was concentrated upon one
point alone; and as their usual vent was closed, it was to be feared
lest extreme tension should give rise to an explosion sooner or later.

I might with a word have loosened the screw of the steel vice that
was crushing his brain; but that word I would not speak.

Yet I was not an ill-natured fellow. Why was I dumb at such a crisis?
Why so insensible to my uncle's interests?

"No, no," I repeated, "I shall not speak. He would insist upon going;
nothing on earth could stop him. His imagination is a volcano, and to
do that which other geologists have never done he would risk his
life. I will preserve silence. I will keep the secret which mere
chance has revealed to me. To discover it, would be to kill Professor
Liedenbrock! Let him find it out himself if he can. I will never have
it laid to my door that I led him to his destruction."

Having formed this resolution, I folded my arms and waited. But I had
not reckoned upon one little incident which turned up a few hours
after.

When our good Martha wanted to go to Market, she found the door
locked. The big key was gone. Who could have taken it out? Assuredly,
it was my uncle, when he returned the night before from his hurried
walk.

Was this done on purpose? Or was it a mistake? Did he want to reduce
us by famine? This seemed like going rather too far! What! should
Martha and I be victims of a position of things in which we had not
the smallest interest? It was a fact that a few years before this,
whilst my uncle was working at his great classification of minerals,
he was forty-eight hours without eating, and all his household were
obliged to share in this scientific fast. As for me, what I remember
is, that I got severe cramps in my stomach, which hardly suited the
constitution of a hungry, growing lad.

Now it appeared to me as if breakfast was going to be wanting, just
as supper had been the night before. Yet I resolved to be a hero, and
not to be conquered by the pangs of hunger. Martha took it very
seriously, and, poor woman, was very much distressed. As for me, the
impossibility of leaving the house distressed me a good deal more,
and for a very good reason. A caged lover's feelings may easily be
imagined.

My uncle went on working, his imagination went off rambling into the
ideal world of combinations; he was far away from earth, and really
far away from earthly wants.

About noon hunger began to stimulate me severely. Martha had, without
thinking any harm, cleared out the larder the night before, so that
now there was nothing left in the house. Still I held out; I made it
a point of honour.

Two o'clock struck. This was becoming ridiculous; worse than that,
unbearable. I began to say to myself that I was exaggerating the
importance of the document; that my uncle would surely not believe in
it, that he would set it down as a mere puzzle; that if it came to
the worst, we should lay violent hands on him and keep him at home if
he thought on venturing on the expedition; that, after all, he might
himself discover the key of the cipher, and that then I should be
clear at the mere expense of my involuntary abstinence.

These reasons seemed excellent to me, though on the night before I
should have rejected them with indignation; I even went so far as to
condemn myself for my absurdity in having waited so long, and I
finally resolved to let it all out.

I was therefore meditating a proper introduction to the matter, so as
not to seem too abrupt, when the Professor jumped up, clapped on his
hat, and prepared to go out.

Surely he was not going out, to shut us in again! no, never!

"Uncle!" I cried.

He seemed not to hear me.

"Uncle Liedenbrock!" I cried, lifting up my voice.

"Ay," he answered like a man suddenly waking.

"Uncle, that key!"

"What key? The door key?"

"No, no!" I cried. "The key of the document."

The Professor stared at me over his spectacles; no doubt he saw
something unusual in the expression of my countenance; for he laid
hold of my arm, and speechlessly questioned me with his eyes. Yes,
never was a question more forcibly put.

I nodded my head up and down.

He shook his pityingly, as if he was dealing with a lunatic. I gave a
more affirmative gesture.

His eyes glistened and sparkled with live fire, his hand was shaken
threateningly.

This mute conversation at such a momentous crisis would have riveted
the attention of the most indifferent. And the fact really was that I
dared not speak now, so intense was the excitement for fear lest my
uncle should smother me in his first joyful embraces. But he became
so urgent that I was at last compelled to answer.

"Yes, that key, chance--"

"What is that you are saying?" he shouted with indescribable emotion.

"There, read that!" I said, presenting a sheet of paper on which I
had written.

"But there is nothing in this," he answered, crumpling up the paper.

"No, nothing until you proceed to read from the end to the beginning."

I had not finished my sentence when the Professor broke out into a
cry, nay, a roar. A new revelation burst in upon him. He was
transformed!

"Aha, clever Saknussemm!" he cried. "You had first written out your
sentence the wrong way."

And darting upon the paper, with eyes bedimmed, and voice choked with
emotion, he read the whole document from the last letter to the first.

It was conceived in the following terms:

     In Sneffels Joculis craterem quem delibat
     Umbra Scartaris Julii intra calendas descende,
     Audax viator, et terrestre centrum attinges.
     Quod feci, Arne Saknussemm.[1]

Which bad Latin may be translated thus:

"Descend, bold traveller, into the crater of the jokul of Sneffels,
which the shadow of Scartaris touches before the kalends of July, and
you will attain the centre of the earth; which I have done, Arne
Saknussemm."

In reading this, my uncle gave a spring as if he had touched a Leyden
jar. His audacity, his joy, and his convictions were magnificent to
behold. He came and he went; he seized his head between both his
hands; he pushed the chairs out of their places, he piled up his
books; incredible as it may seem, he rattled his precious nodules of
flints together; he sent a kick here, a thump there. At last his
nerves calmed down, and like a man exhausted by too lavish an
expenditure of vital power, he sank back exhausted into his armchair.

"What o'clock is it?" he asked after a few moments of silence.

"Three o'clock," I replied.

"Is it really? The dinner-hour is past, and I did not know it. I am
half dead with hunger. Come on, and after dinner--"

[1] In the cipher, _audax_ is written _avdas,_ and _quod_ and _quem,_
_hod_ and _ken_. (Tr.)

"Well?"

"After dinner, pack up my trunk."

"What?" I cried.

"And yours!" replied the indefatigable Professor, entering the
dining-room.




CHAPTER VI.

EXCITING DISCUSSIONS ABOUT AN UNPARALLELED ENTERPRISE


At these words a cold shiver ran through me. Yet I controlled myself;
I even resolved to put a good face upon it. Scientific arguments
alone could have any weight with Professor Liedenbrock. Now there
were good ones against the practicability of such a journey.
Penetrate to the centre of the earth! What nonsense! But I kept my
dialectic battery in reserve for a suitable opportunity, and I
interested myself in the prospect of my dinner, which was not yet
forthcoming.

It is no use to tell of the rage and imprecations of my uncle before
the empty table. Explanations were given, Martha was set at liberty,
ran off to the market, and did her part so well that in an hour
afterwards my hunger was appeased, and I was able to return to the
contemplation of the gravity of the situation.

During all dinner time my uncle was almost merry; he indulged in some
of those learned jokes which never do anybody any harm. Dessert over,
he beckoned me into his study.

I obeyed; he sat at one end of his table, I at the other.

"Axel," said he very mildly; "you are a very ingenious young man, you
have done me a splendid service, at a moment when, wearied out with
the struggle, I was going to abandon the contest. Where should I have
lost myself? None can tell. Never, my lad, shall I forget it; and you
shall have your share in the glory to which your discovery will lead."

"Oh, come!" thought I, "he is in a good way. Now is the time for
discussing that same glory."

"Before all things," my uncle resumed, "I enjoin you to preserve the
most inviolable secrecy: you understand? There are not a few in the
scientific world who envy my success, and many would be ready to
undertake this enterprise, to whom our return should be the first
news of it."

"Do you really think there are many people bold enough?" said I.

"Certainly; who would hesitate to acquire such renown? If that
document were divulged, a whole army of geologists would be ready to
rush into the footsteps of Arne Saknussemm."

"I don't feel so very sure of that, uncle," I replied; "for we have
no proof of the authenticity of this document."

"What! not of the book, inside which we have discovered it?"

"Granted. I admit that Saknussemm may have written these lines. But
does it follow that he has really accomplished such a journey? And
may it not be that this old parchment is intended to mislead?"

I almost regretted having uttered this last word, which dropped from
me in an unguarded moment. The Professor bent his shaggy brows, and I
feared I had seriously compromised my own safety. Happily no great
harm came of it. A smile flitted across the lip of my severe
companion, and he answered:

"That is what we shall see."

"Ah!" said I, rather put out. "But do let me exhaust all the possible
objections against this document."

"Speak, my boy, don't be afraid. You are quite at liberty to express
your opinions. You are no longer my nephew only, but my colleague.
Pray go on."

"Well, in the first place, I wish to ask what are this Jokul, this
Sneffels, and this Scartaris, names which I have never heard before?"

"Nothing easier. I received not long ago a map from my friend,
Augustus Petermann, at Liepzig. Nothing could be more apropos. Take
down the third atlas in the second shelf in the large bookcase,
series Z, plate 4."

I rose, and with the help of such precise instructions could not fail
to find the required atlas. My uncle opened it and said:

"Here is one of the best maps of Iceland, that of Handersen, and I
believe this will solve the worst of our difficulties."

I bent over the map.

"You see this volcanic island," said the Professor; "observe that all
the volcanoes are called jokuls, a word which means glacier in
Icelandic, and under the high latitude of Iceland nearly all the
active volcanoes discharge through beds of ice. Hence this term of
jokul is applied to all the eruptive mountains in Iceland."

"Very good," said I; "but what of Sneffels?"

I was hoping that this question would be unanswerable; but I was
mistaken. My uncle replied:

"Follow my finger along the west coast of Iceland. Do you see
Rejkiavik, the capital? You do. Well; ascend the innumerable fiords
that indent those sea-beaten shores, and stop at the sixty-fifth
degree of latitude. What do you see there?"

"I see a peninsula looking like a thigh bone with the knee bone at
the end of it."

"A very fair comparison, my lad. Now do you see anything upon that
knee bone?"

"Yes; a mountain rising out of the sea."

"Right. That is Snfell."

"That Snfell?"

"It is. It is a mountain five thousand feet high, one of the most
remarkable in the world, if its crater leads down to the centre of
the earth."

"But that is impossible," I said shrugging my shoulders, and
disgusted at such a ridiculous supposition.

"Impossible?" said the Professor severely; "and why, pray?"

"Because this crater is evidently filled with lava and burning rocks,
and therefore--"

"But suppose it is an extinct volcano?"

"Extinct?"

"Yes; the number of active volcanoes on the surface of the globe is
at the present time only about three hundred. But there is a very
much larger number of extinct ones. Now, Snfell is one of these.
Since historic times there has been but one eruption of this
mountain, that of 1219; from that time it has quieted down more and
more, and now it is no longer reckoned among active volcanoes."

To such positive statements I could make no reply. I therefore took
refuge in other dark passages of the document.

"What is the meaning of this word Scartaris, and what have the
kalends of July to do with it?"

My uncle took a few minutes to consider. For one short moment I felt
a ray of hope, speedily to be extinguished. For he soon answered thus:

"What is darkness to you is light to me. This proves the ingenious
care with which Saknussemm guarded and defined his discovery.
Sneffels, or Snfell, has several craters. It was therefore necessary
to point out which of these leads to the centre of the globe. What
did the Icelandic sage do? He observed that at the approach of the
kalends of July, that is to say in the last days of June, one of the
peaks, called Scartaris, flung its shadow down the mouth of that
particular crater, and he committed that fact to his document. Could
there possibly have been a more exact guide? As soon as we have
arrived at the summit of Snfell we shall have no hesitation as to
the proper road to take."

Decidedly, my uncle had answered every one of my objections. I saw
that his position on the old parchment was impregnable. I therefore
ceased to press him upon that part of the subject, and as above all
things he must be convinced, I passed on to scientific objections,
which in my opinion were far more serious.

"Well, then," I said, "I am forced to admit that Saknussemm's
sentence is clear, and leaves no room for doubt. I will even allow
that the document bears every mark and evidence of authenticity. That
learned philosopher did get to the bottom of Sneffels, he has seen
the shadow of Scartaris touch the edge of the crater before the
kalends of July; he may even have heard the legendary stories told in
his day about that crater reaching to the centre of the world; but as
for reaching it himself, as for performing the journey, and
returning, if he ever went, I say no--he never, never did that."

"Now for your reason?" said my uncle ironically.

"All the theories of science demonstrate such a feat to be
impracticable."

"The theories say that, do they?" replied the Professor in the tone
of a meek disciple. "Oh! unpleasant theories! How the theories will
hinder us, won't they?"

I saw that he was only laughing at me; but I went on all the same.

"Yes; it is perfectly well known that the internal temperature rises
one degree for every 70 feet in depth; now, admitting this proportion
to be constant, and the radius of the earth being fifteen hundred
leagues, there must be a temperature of 360,032 degrees at the centre
of the earth. Therefore, all the substances that compose the body of
this earth must exist there in a state of incandescent gas; for the
metals that most resist the action of heat, gold, and platinum, and
the hardest rocks, can never be either solid or liquid under such a
temperature. I have therefore good reason for asking if it is
possible to penetrate through such a medium."

"So, Axel, it is the heat that troubles you?"

"Of course it is. Were we to reach a depth of thirty miles we should
have arrived at the limit of the terrestrial crust, for there the
temperature will be more than 2372 degrees."

"Are you afraid of being put into a state of fusion?"

"I will leave you to decide that question," I answered rather
sullenly. "This is my decision," replied Professor Liedenbrock,
putting on one of his grandest airs. "Neither you nor anybody else
knows with any certainty what is going on in the interior of this
globe, since not the twelve thousandth part of its radius is known;
science is eminently perfectible; and every new theory is soon routed
by a newer. Was it not always believed until Fourier that the
temperature of the interplanetary spaces decreased perpetually? and
is it not known at the present time that the greatest cold of the
ethereal regions is never lower than 40 degrees below zero Fahr.? Why
should it not be the same with the internal heat? Why should it not,
at a certain depth, attain an impassable limit, instead of rising to
such a point as to fuse the most infusible metals?"

As my uncle was now taking his stand upon hypotheses, of course,
there was nothing to be said.

"Well, I will tell you that true savants, amongst them Poisson, have
demonstrated that if a heat of 360,000 degrees [1] existed in the
interior of the globe, the fiery gases arising from the fused matter
would acquire an elastic force which the crust of the earth would be
unable to resist, and that it would explode like the plates of a
bursting boiler."

"That is Poisson's opinion, my uncle, nothing more."

"Granted. But it is likewise the creed adopted by other distinguished
geologists, that the interior of the globe is neither gas nor water,
nor any of the heaviest minerals known, for in none of these cases
would the earth weigh what it does."

"Oh, with figures you may prove anything!"

"But is it the same with facts! Is it not known that the number of
volcanoes has diminished since the first days of creation? and if
there is central heat may we not thence conclude that it is in
process of diminution?"

"My good uncle, if you will enter into the legion of speculation, I
can discuss the matter no longer."

"But I have to tell you that the highest names have come to the
support of my views. Do you remember a visit paid to me by the
celebrated chemist, Humphry Davy, in 1825?"

"Not at all, for I was not born until nineteen years afterwards."

"Well, Humphry Davy did call upon me on his way through Hamburg. We
were long engaged in discussing, amongst other problems, the
hypothesis of the liquid structure of the terrestrial nucleus. We
were agreed that it could not be in a liquid state, for a reason
which science has never been able to confute."

[1] The degrees of temperature are given by Jules Verne according to
the centigrade system, for which we will in each case substitute the
Fahrenheit measurement. (Tr.)

"What is that reason?" I said, rather astonished.

"Because this liquid mass would be subject, like the ocean, to the
lunar attraction, and therefore twice every day there would be
internal tides, which, upheaving the terrestrial crust, would cause
periodical earthquakes!"

"Yet it is evident that the surface of the globe has been subject to
the action of fire," I replied, "and it is quite reasonable to
suppose that the external crust cooled down first, whilst the heat
took refuge down to the centre."

"Quite a mistake," my uncle answered. "The earth has been heated by
combustion on its surface, that is all. Its surface was composed of a
great number of metals, such as potassium and sodium, which have the
peculiar property of igniting at the mere contact with air and water;
these metals kindled when the atmospheric vapours fell in rain upon
the soil; and by and by, when the waters penetrated into the fissures
of the crust of the earth, they broke out into fresh combustion with
explosions and eruptions. Such was the cause of the numerous
volcanoes at the origin of the earth."

"Upon my word, this is a very clever hypothesis," I exclaimed, in
spite rather of myself.

"And which Humphry Davy demonstrated to me by a simple experiment. He
formed a small ball of the metals which I have named, and which was a
very fair representation of our globe; whenever he caused a fine dew
of rain to fall upon its surface, it heaved up into little
monticules, it became oxydized and formed miniature mountains; a
crater broke open at one of its summits; the eruption took place, and
communicated to the whole of the ball such a heat that it could not
be held in the hand."

In truth, I was beginning to be shaken by the Professor's arguments,
besides which he gave additional weight to them by his usual ardour
and fervent enthusiasm.

"You see, Axel," he added, "the condition of the terrestrial nucleus
has given rise to various hypotheses among geologists; there is no
proof at all for this internal heat; my opinion is that there is no
such thing, it cannot be; besides we shall see for ourselves, and,
like Arne Saknussemm, we shall know exactly what to hold as truth
concerning this grand question."

"Very well, we shall see," I replied, feeling myself carried off by
his contagious enthusiasm. "Yes, we shall see; that is, if it is
possible to see anything there."

"And why not? May we not depend upon electric phenomena to give us
light? May we not even expect light from the atmosphere, the pressure
of which may render it luminous as we approach the centre?"

"Yes, yes," said I; "that is possible, too."

"It is certain," exclaimed my uncle in a tone of triumph. "But
silence, do you hear me? silence upon the whole subject; and let no
one get before us in this design of discovering the centre of the
earth."




CHAPTER VII.

A WOMAN'S COURAGE


Thus ended this memorable seance. That conversation threw me into a
fever. I came out of my uncle's study as if I had been stunned, and
as if there was not air enough in all the streets of Hamburg to put
me right again. I therefore made for the banks of the Elbe, where the
steamer lands her passengers, which forms the communication between
the city and the Hamburg railway.

Was I convinced of the truth of what I had heard? Had I not bent
under the iron rule of the Professor Liedenbrock? Was I to believe
him in earnest in his intention to penetrate to the centre of this
massive globe? Had I been listening to the mad speculations of a
lunatic, or to the scientific conclusions of a lofty genius? Where
did truth stop? Where did error begin?

I was all adrift amongst a thousand contradictory hypotheses, but I
could not lay hold of one.

Yet I remembered that I had been convinced, although now my
enthusiasm was beginning to cool down; but I felt a desire to start
at once, and not to lose time and courage by calm reflection. I had
at that moment quite courage enough to strap my knapsack to my
shoulders and start.

But I must confess that in another hour this unnatural excitement
abated, my nerves became unstrung, and from the depths of the abysses
of this earth I ascended to its surface again.

"It is quite absurd!" I cried, "there is no sense about it. No
sensible young man should for a moment entertain such a proposal. The
whole thing is non-existent. I have had a bad night, I have been
dreaming of horrors."

But I had followed the banks of the Elbe and passed the town. After
passing the port too, I had reached the Altona road. I was led by a
presentiment, soon to be realised; for shortly I espied my little
Gruben bravely returning with her light step to Hamburg.

"Gruben!" I cried from afar off.

The young girl stopped, rather frightened perhaps to hear her name
called after her on the high road. Ten yards more, and I had joined
her.

"Axel!" she cried surprised. "What! have you come to meet me? Is this
why you are here, sir?"

But when she had looked upon me, Gruben could not fail to see the
uneasiness and distress of my mind.

"What is the matter?" she said, holding out her hand.

"What is the matter, Gruben?" I cried.

In a couple of minutes my pretty Virlandaise was fully informed of
the position of affairs. For a time she was silent. Did her heart
palpitate as mine did? I don't know about that, but I know that her
hand did not tremble in mine. We went on a hundred yards without
speaking.

At last she said, "Axel!"

"My dear Gruben."

"That will be a splendid journey!"

I gave a bound at these words.

"Yes, Axel, a journey worthy of the nephew of a savant; it is a good
thing for a man to be distinguished by some great enterprise."

"What, Gruben, won't you dissuade me from such an undertaking?"

"No, my dear Axel, and I would willingly go with you, but that a poor
girl would only be in your way."

"Is that quite true?"

"It is true."

Ah! women and young girls, how incomprehensible are your feminine
hearts! When you are not the timidest, you are the bravest of
creatures. Reason has nothing to do with your actions. What! did this
child encourage me in such an expedition! Would she not be afraid to
join it herself? And she was driving me to it, one whom she loved!

I was disconcerted, and, if I must tell the whole truth, I was
ashamed.

"Gruben, we will see whether you will say the same thing to-morrow."

"To-morrow, dear Axel, I will say what I say to-day."

Gruben and I, hand in hand, but in silence, pursued our way. The
emotions of that day were breaking my heart.

After all, I thought, the kalends of July are a long way off, and
between this and then many things may take place which will cure my
uncle of his desire to travel underground.

It was night when we arrived at the house in Knigstrasse. I expected
to find all quiet there, my uncle in bed as was his custom, and
Martha giving her last touches with the feather brush.

But I had not taken into account the Professor's impatience. I found
him shouting--and working himself up amidst a crowd of porters and
messengers who were all depositing various loads in the passage. Our
old servant was at her wits' end.

"Come, Axel, come, you miserable wretch," my uncle cried from as far
off as he could see me. "Your boxes are not packed, and my papers are
not arranged; where's the key of my carpet bag? and what have you
done with my gaiters?"

I stood thunderstruck. My voice failed. Scarcely could my lips utter
the words:

"Are we really going?"

"Of course, you unhappy boy! Could I have dreamed that you would have
gone out for a walk instead of hurrying your preparations forward?"

"Are we to go?" I asked again, with sinking hopes.

"Yes; the day after to-morrow, early."

I could hear no more. I fled for refuge into my own little room.

All hope was now at an end. My uncle had been all the morning making
purchases of a part of the tools and apparatus required for this
desperate undertaking. The passage was encumbered with rope ladders,
knotted cords, torches, flasks, grappling irons, alpenstocks,
pickaxes, iron shod sticks, enough to load ten men.

I spent an awful night. Next morning I was called early. I had quite
decided I would not open the door. But how was I to resist the sweet
voice which was always music to my ears, saying, "My dear Axel?"

I came out of my room. I thought my pale countenance and my red and
sleepless eyes would work upon Gruben's sympathies and change her
mind.

"Ah! my dear Axel," she said. "I see you are better. A night's rest
has done you good."

"Done me good!" I exclaimed.

I rushed to the glass. Well, in fact I did look better than I had
expected. I could hardly believe my own eyes.

"Axel," she said, "I have had a long talk with my guardian. He is a
bold philosopher, a man of immense courage, and you must remember
that his blood flows in your veins. He has confided to me his plans,
his hopes, and why and how he hopes to attain his object. He will no
doubt succeed. My dear Axel, it is a grand thing to devote yourself
to science! What honour will fall upon Herr Liedenbrock, and so be
reflected upon his companion! When you return, Axel, you will be a
man, his equal, free to speak and to act independently, and free to
--"

The dear girl only finished this sentence by blushing. Her words
revived me. Yet I refused to believe we should start. I drew Gruben
into the Professor's study.

"Uncle, is it true that we are to go?"

"Why do you doubt?"

"Well, I don't doubt," I said, not to vex him; "but, I ask, what need
is there to hurry?"

"Time, time, flying with irreparable rapidity."

"But it is only the 16th May, and until the end of June--"

"What, you monument of ignorance! do you think you can get to Iceland
in a couple of days? If you had not deserted me like a fool I should
have taken you to the Copenhagen office, to Liffender & Co., and you
would have learned then that there is only one trip every month from
Copenhagen to Rejkiavik, on the 22nd."

"Well?"

"Well, if we waited for the 22nd June we should be too late to see
the shadow of Scartaris touch the crater of Sneffels. Therefore we
must get to Copenhagen as fast as we can to secure our passage. Go
and pack up."

There was no reply to this. I went up to my room. Gruben followed
me. She undertook to pack up all things necessary for my voyage. She
was no more moved than if I had been starting for a little trip to
Lbeck or Heligoland. Her little hands moved without haste. She
talked quietly. She supplied me with sensible reasons for our
expedition. She delighted me, and yet I was angry with her. Now and
then I felt I ought to break out into a passion, but she took no
notice and went on her way as methodically as ever.

Finally the last strap was buckled; I came downstairs. All that day
the philosophical instrument makers and the electricians kept coming
and going. Martha was distracted.

"Is master mad?" she asked.

I nodded my head.

"And is he going to take you with him?"

I nodded again.

"Where to?"

I pointed with my finger downward.

"Down into the cellar?" cried the old servant.

"No," I said. "Lower down than that."

Night came. But I knew nothing about the lapse of time.

"To-morrow morning at six precisely," my uncle decreed "we start."

At ten o'clock I fell upon my bed, a dead lump of inert matter. All
through the night terror had hold of me. I spent it dreaming of
abysses. I was a prey to delirium. I felt myself grasped by the
Professor's sinewy hand, dragged along, hurled down, shattered into
little bits. I dropped down unfathomable precipices with the
accelerating velocity of bodies falling through space. My life had
become an endless fall. I awoke at five with shattered nerves,
trembling and weary. I came downstairs. My uncle was at table,
devouring his breakfast. I stared at him with horror and disgust. But
dear Gruben was there; so I said nothing, and could eat nothing.

At half-past five there was a rattle of wheels outside. A large
carriage was there to take us to the Altona railway station. It was
soon piled up with my uncle's multifarious preparations.

"Where's your box?" he cried.

"It is ready," I replied, with faltering voice.

"Then make haste down, or we shall lose the train."

It was now manifestly impossible to maintain the struggle against
destiny. I went up again to my room, and rolling my portmanteaus
downstairs I darted after him.

At that moment my uncle was solemnly investing Gruben with the reins
of government. My pretty Virlandaise was as calm and collected as was
her wont. She kissed her guardian; but could not restrain a tear in
touching my cheek with her gentle lips.

"Gruben!" I murmured.

"Go, my dear Axel, go! I am now your betrothed; and when you come
back I will be your wife."

I pressed her in my arms and took my place in the carriage. Martha
and the young girl, standing at the door, waved their last farewell.
Then the horses, roused by the driver's whistling, darted off at a
gallop on the road to Altona.




CHAPTER VIII.

SERIOUS PREPARATIONS FOR VERTICAL DESCENT


Altona, which is but a suburb of Hamburg, is the terminus of the Kiel
railway, which was to carry us to the Belts. In twenty minutes we
were in Holstein.

At half-past six the carriage stopped at the station; my uncle's
numerous packages, his voluminous _impedimenta,_ were unloaded,
removed, labelled, weighed, put into the luggage vans, and at seven
we were seated face to face in our compartment. The whistle sounded,
the engine started, we were off.

Was I resigned? No, not yet. Yet the cool morning air and the scenes
on the road, rapidly changed by the swiftness of the train, drew me
away somewhat from my sad reflections.

As for the Professor's reflections, they went far in advance of the
swiftest express. We were alone in the carriage, but we sat in
silence. My uncle examined all his pockets and his travelling bag
with the minutest care. I saw that he had not forgotten the smallest
matter of detail.

Amongst other documents, a sheet of paper, carefully folded, bore the
heading of the Danish consulate with the signature of W.
Christiensen, consul at Hamburg and the Professor's friend. With this
we possessed the proper introductions to the Governor of Iceland.

I also observed the famous document most carefully laid up in a
secret pocket in his portfolio. I bestowed a malediction upon it, and
then proceeded to examine the country.

It was a very long succession of uninteresting loamy and fertile
flats, a very easy country for the construction of railways, and
propitious for the laying-down of these direct level lines so dear to
railway companies.

I had no time to get tired of the monotony; for in three hours we
stopped at Kiel, close to the sea.

The luggage being labelled for Copenhagen, we had no occasion to look
after it. Yet the Professor watched every article with jealous
vigilance, until all were safe on board. There they disappeared in
the hold.

My uncle, notwithstanding his hurry, had so well calculated the
relations between the train and the steamer that we had a whole day
to spare. The steamer _Ellenora,_ did not start until night. Thence
sprang a feverish state of excitement in which the impatient
irascible traveller devoted to perdition the railway directors and
the steamboat companies and the governments which allowed such
intolerable slowness. I was obliged to act chorus to him when he
attacked the captain of the _Ellenora_ upon this subject. The captain
disposed of us summarily.

At Kiel, as elsewhere, we must do something to while away the time.
What with walking on the verdant shores of the bay within which
nestles the little town, exploring the thick woods which make it look
like a nest embowered amongst thick foliage, admiring the villas,
each provided with a little bathing house, and moving about and
grumbling, at last ten o'clock came.

The heavy coils of smoke from the _Ellenora's_ funnel unrolled in the
sky, the bridge shook with the quivering of the struggling steam; we
were on board, and owners for the time of two berths, one over the
other, in the only saloon cabin on board.

At a quarter past the moorings were loosed and the throbbing steamer
pursued her way over the dark waters of the Great Belt.

The night was dark; there was a sharp breeze and a rough sea, a few
lights appeared on shore through the thick darkness; later on, I
cannot tell when, a dazzling light from some lighthouse threw a
bright stream of fire along the waves; and this is all I can remember
of this first portion of our sail.

At seven in the morning we landed at Korsor, a small town on the west
coast of Zealand. There we were transferred from the boat to another
line of railway, which took us by just as flat a country as the plain
of Holstein.

Three hours' travelling brought us to the capital of Denmark. My
uncle had not shut his eyes all night. In his impatience I believe he
was trying to accelerate the train with his feet.

At last he discerned a stretch of sea.

"The Sound!" he cried.

At our left was a huge building that looked like a hospital.

"That's a lunatic asylum," said one of or travelling companions.

Very good! thought I, just the place we want to end our days in; and
great as it is, that asylum is not big enough to contain all
Professor Liedenbrock's madness!

At ten in the morning, at last, we set our feet in Copenhagen; the
luggage was put upon a carriage and taken with ourselves to the
Phoenix Hotel in Breda Gate. This took half an hour, for the station
is out of the town. Then my uncle, after a hasty toilet, dragged me
after him. The porter at the hotel could speak German and English;
but the Professor, as a polyglot, questioned him in good Danish, and
it was in the same language that that personage directed him to the
Museum of Northern Antiquities.

The curator of this curious establishment, in which wonders are
gathered together out of which the ancient history of the country
might be reconstructed by means of its stone weapons, its cups and
its jewels, was a learned savant, the friend of the Danish consul at
Hamburg, Professor Thomsen.

My uncle had a cordial letter of introduction to him. As a general
rule one savant greets another with coolness. But here the case was
different. M. Thomsen, like a good friend, gave the Professor
Liedenbrock a cordial greeting, and he even vouchsafed the same
kindness to his nephew. It is hardly necessary to say the secret was
sacredly kept from the excellent curator; we were simply
disinterested travellers visiting Iceland out of harmless curiosity.

M. Thomsen placed his services at our disposal, and we visited the
quays with the object of finding out the next vessel to sail.

I was yet in hopes that there would be no means of getting to
Iceland. But there was no such luck. A small Danish schooner, the
_Valkyria_, was to set sail for Rejkiavik on the 2nd of June. The
captain, M. Bjarne, was on board. His intending passenger was so
joyful that he almost squeezed his hands till they ached. That good
man was rather surprised at his energy. To him it seemed a very
simple thing to go to Iceland, as that was his business; but to my
uncle it was sublime. The worthy captain took advantage of his
enthusiasm to charge double fares; but we did not trouble ourselves
about mere trifles. .

"You must be on board on Tuesday, at seven in the morning," said
Captain Bjarne, after having pocketed more dollars than were his due.

Then we thanked M. Thomsen for his kindness, "and we returned to the
Phoenix Hotel.

"It's all right, it's all right," my uncle repeated. "How fortunate
we are to have found this boat ready for sailing. Now let us have
some breakfast and go about the town."

We went first to Kongens-nye-Torw, an irregular square in which are
two innocent-looking guns, which need not alarm any one. Close by, at
No. 5, there was a French "restaurant," kept by a cook of the name of
Vincent, where we had an ample breakfast for four marks each (2_s_.
4_d_.).

Then I took a childish pleasure in exploring the city; my uncle let
me take him with me, but he took notice of nothing, neither the
insignificant king's palace, nor the pretty seventeenth century
bridge, which spans the canal before the museum, nor that immense
cenotaph of Thorwaldsen's, adorned with horrible mural painting, and
containing within it a collection of the sculptor's works, nor in a
fine park the toylike chateau of Rosenberg, nor the beautiful
renaissance edifice of the Exchange, nor its spire composed of the
twisted tails of four bronze dragons, nor the great windmill on the
ramparts, whose huge arms dilated in the sea breeze like the sails of
a ship.

What delicious walks we should have had together, my pretty
Virlandaise and I, along the harbour where the two-deckers and the
frigate slept peaceably by the red roofing of the warehouse, by the
green banks of the strait, through the deep shades of the trees
amongst which the fort is half concealed, where the guns are
thrusting out their black throats between branches of alder and
willow.

But, alas! Gruben was far away; and I never hoped to see her again.

But if my uncle felt no attraction towards these romantic scenes he
was very much struck with the aspect of a certain church spire
situated in the island of Amak, which forms the south-west quarter of
Copenhagen.

I was ordered to direct my feet that way; I embarked on a small
steamer which plies on the canals, and in a few minutes she touched
the quay of the dockyard.

After crossing a few narrow streets where some convicts, in trousers
half yellow and half grey, were at work under the orders of the
gangers, we arrived at the Vor Frelsers Kirk. There was nothing
remarkable about the church; but there was a reason why its tall
spire had attracted the Professor's attention. Starting from the top
of the tower, an external staircase wound around the spire, the
spirals circling up into the sky.

"Let us get to the top," said my uncle.

"I shall be dizzy," I said.

"The more reason why we should go up; we must get used to it."

"But--"

"Come, I tell you; don't waste our time."

I had to obey. A keeper who lived at the other end of the street
handed us the key, and the ascent began.

My uncle went ahead with a light step. I followed him not without
alarm, for my head was very apt to feel dizzy; I possessed neither
the equilibrium of an eagle nor his fearless nature.

As long as we were protected on the inside of the winding staircase
up the tower, all was well enough; but after toiling up a hundred and
fifty steps the fresh air came to salute my face, and we were on the
leads of the tower. There the aerial staircase began its gyrations,
only guarded by a thin iron rail, and the narrowing steps seemed to
ascend into infinite space!

"Never shall I be able to do it," I said.

"Don't be a coward; come up, sir"; said my uncle with the coldest
cruelty.

I had to follow, clutching at every step. The keen air made me giddy;
I felt the spire rocking with every gust of wind; my knees began to
fail; soon I was crawling on my knees, then creeping on my stomach; I
closed my eyes; I seemed to be lost in space.

At last I reached the apex, with the assistance of my uncle dragging
me up by the collar.

"Look down!" he cried. "Look down well! You must take a lesson
in abysses."

I opened my eyes. I saw houses squashed flat as if they had all
fallen down from the skies; a smoke fog seemed to drown them. Over my
head ragged clouds were drifting past, and by an optical inversion
they seemed stationary, while the steeple, the ball and I were all
spinning along with fantastic speed. Far away on one side was the
green country, on the other the sea sparkled, bathed in sunlight. The
Sound stretched away to Elsinore, dotted with a few white sails, like
sea-gulls' wings; and in the misty east and away to the north-east
lay outstretched the faintly-shadowed shores of Sweden. All this
immensity of space whirled and wavered, fluctuating beneath my eyes.

But I was compelled to rise, to stand up, to look. My first lesson in
dizziness lasted an hour. When I got permission to come down and feel
the solid street pavements I was afflicted with severe lumbago.

"To-morrow we will do it again," said the Professor.

And it was so; for five days in succession, I was obliged to undergo
this anti-vertiginous exercise; and whether I would or not, I made
some improvement in the art of "lofty contemplations."




CHAPTER IX.

ICELAND! BUT WHAT NEXT?


The day for our departure arrived. The day before it our kind friend
M. Thomsen brought us letters of introduction to Count Trampe, the
Governor of Iceland, M. Picturssen, the bishop's suffragan, and M.
Finsen, mayor of Rejkiavik. My uncle expressed his gratitude by
tremendous compressions of both his hands.

On the 2nd, at six in the evening, all our precious baggage being
safely on board the _Valkyria,_ the captain took us into a very
narrow cabin.

"Is the wind favourable?" my uncle asked.

"Excellent," replied Captain Bjarne; "a sou'-easter. We shall pass
down the Sound full speed, with all sails set."

In a few minutes the schooner, under her mizen, brigantine, topsail,
and topgallant sail, loosed from her moorings and made full sail
through the straits. In an hour the capital of Denmark seemed to sink
below the distant waves, and the _Valkyria_ was skirting the coast by
Elsinore. In my nervous frame of mind I expected to see the ghost of
Hamlet wandering on the legendary castle terrace.

"Sublime madman!" I said, "no doubt you would approve of our
expedition. Perhaps you would keep us company to the centre of the
globe, to find the solution of your eternal doubts."

But there was no ghostly shape upon the ancient walls. Indeed, the
castle is much younger than the heroic prince of Denmark. It now
answers the purpose of a sumptuous lodge for the doorkeeper of the
straits of the Sound, before which every year there pass fifteen
thousand ships of all nations.

The castle of Kronsberg soon disappeared in the mist, as well as the
tower of Helsingborg, built on the Swedish coast, and the schooner
passed lightly on her way urged by the breezes of the Cattegat.

The _Valkyria_ was a splendid sailer, but on a sailing vessel you can
place no dependence. She was taking to Rejkiavik coal, household
goods, earthenware, woollen clothing, and a cargo of wheat. The crew
consisted of five men, all Danes.

"How long will the passage take?" my uncle asked.

"Ten days," the captain replied, "if we don't meet a nor'-wester in
passing the Faroes."

"But are you not subject to considerable delays?"

"No, M. Liedenbrock, don't be uneasy, we shall get there in very good
time."

At evening the schooner doubled the Skaw at the northern point of
Denmark, in the night passed the Skager Rack, skirted Norway by Cape
Lindness, and entered the North Sea.

In two days more we sighted the coast of Scotland near Peterhead, and
the _Valkyria_ turned her lead towards the Faroe Islands, passing
between the Orkneys and Shetlands.

Soon the schooner encountered the great Atlantic swell; she had to
tack against the north wind, and reached the Faroes only with some
difficulty. On the 8th the captain made out Myganness, the
southernmost of these islands, and from that moment took a straight
course for Cape Portland, the most southerly point of Iceland.

The passage was marked by nothing unusual. I bore the troubles of the
sea pretty well; my uncle, to his own intense disgust, and his
greater shame, was ill all through the voyage.

He therefore was unable to converse with the captain about Snfell,
the way to get to it, the facilities for transport, he was obliged to
put off these inquiries until his arrival, and spent all his time at
full length in his cabin, of which the timbers creaked and shook with
every pitch she took. It must be confessed he was not undeserving of
his punishment.

On the 11th we reached Cape Portland. The clear open weather gave us
a good view of Myrdals jokul, which overhangs it. The cape is merely
a low hill with steep sides, standing lonely by the beach.

The _Valkyria_ kept at some distance from the coast, taking a
westerly course amidst great shoals of whales and sharks. Soon we
came in sight of an enormous perforated rock, through which the sea
dashed furiously. The Westman islets seemed to rise out of the ocean
like a group of rocks in a liquid plain. From that time the schooner
took a wide berth and swept at a great distance round Cape
Rejkianess, which forms the western point of Iceland.

The rough sea prevented my uncle from coming on deck to admire these
shattered and surf-beaten coasts.

Forty-eight hours after, coming out of a storm which forced the
schooner to scud under bare poles, we sighted east of us the beacon
on Cape Skagen, where dangerous rocks extend far away seaward. An
Icelandic pilot came on board, and in three hours the _Valkyria_
dropped her anchor before Rejkiavik, in Faxa Bay.

The Professor at last emerged from his cabin, rather pale and
wretched-looking, but still full of enthusiasm, and with ardent
satisfaction shining in his eyes.

The population of the town, wonderfully interested in the arrival of
a vessel from which every one expected something, formed in groups
upon the quay.

My uncle left in haste his floating prison, or rather hospital. But
before quitting the deck of the schooner he dragged me forward, and
pointing with outstretched finger north of the bay at a distant
mountain terminating in a double peak, a pair of cones covered with
perpetual snow, he cried:

"Snfell! Snfell!"

Then recommending me, by an impressive gesture, to keep silence, he
went into the boat which awaited him. I followed, and presently we
were treading the soil of Iceland.

The first man we saw was a good-looking fellow enough, in a general's
uniform. Yet he was not a general but a magistrate, the Governor of
the island, M. le Baron Trampe himself. The Professor was soon aware
of the presence he was in. He delivered him his letters from
Copenhagen, and then followed a short conversation in the Danish
language, the purport of which I was quite ignorant of, and for a
very good reason. But the result of this first conversation was, that
Baron Trampe placed himself entirely at the service of Professor
Liedenbrock.

My uncle was just as courteously received by the mayor, M. Finsen,
whose appearance was as military, and disposition and office as
pacific, as the Governor's.

As for the bishop's suffragan, M. Picturssen, he was at that moment
engaged on an episcopal visitation in the north. For the time we must
be resigned to wait for the honour of being presented to him. But M.
Fridrikssen, professor of natural sciences at the school of
Rejkiavik, was a delightful man, and his friendship became very
precious to me. This modest philosopher spoke only Danish and Latin.
He came to proffer me his good offices in the language of Horace, and
I felt that we were made to understand each other. In fact he was the
only person in Iceland with whom I could converse at all.

This good-natured gentleman made over to us two of the three rooms
which his house contained, and we were soon installed in it with all
our luggage, the abundance of which rather astonished the good people
of Rejkiavik.

"Well, Axel," said my uncle, "we are getting on, and now the worst is
over."

"The worst!" I said, astonished.

"To be sure, now we have nothing to do but go down."

"Oh, if that is all, you are quite right; but after all, when we have
gone down, we shall have to get up again, I suppose?"

"Oh I don't trouble myself about that. Come, there's no time to lose;
I am going to the library. Perhaps there is some manuscript of
Saknussemm's there, and I should be glad to consult it."

"Well, while you are there I will go into the town. Won't you?"

"Oh, that is very uninteresting to me. It is not what is upon this
island, but what is underneath, that interests me."

I went out, and wandered wherever chance took me.

It would not be easy to lose your way in Rejkiavik. I was therefore
under no necessity to inquire the road, which exposes one to mistakes
when the only medium of intercourse is gesture.

The town extends along a low and marshy level, between two hills. An
immense bed of lava bounds it on one side, and falls gently towards
the sea. On the other extends the vast bay of Faxa, shut in at the
north by the enormous glacier of the Snfell, and of which the
_Valkyria_ was for the time the only occupant. Usually the English
and French conservators of fisheries moor in this bay, but just then
they were cruising about the western coasts of the island.

The longest of the only two streets that Rejkiavik possesses was
parallel with the beach. Here live the merchants and traders, in
wooden cabins made of red planks set horizontally; the other street,
running west, ends at the little lake between the house of the bishop
and other non-commercial people.

I had soon explored these melancholy ways; here and there I got a
glimpse of faded turf, looking like a worn-out bit of carpet, or some
appearance of a kitchen garden, the sparse vegetables of which
(potatoes, cabbages, and lettuces), would have figured appropriately
upon a Lilliputian table. A few sickly wallflowers were trying to
enjoy the air and sunshine.

About the middle of the tin-commercial street I found the public
cemetery, inclosed with a mud wall, and where there seemed plenty of
room.

Then a few steps brought me to the Governor's house, a but compared
with the town hall of Hamburg, a palace in comparison with the cabins
of the Icelandic population.

Between the little lake and the town the church is built in the
Protestant style, of calcined stones extracted out of the volcanoes
by their own labour and at their own expense; in high westerly winds
it was manifest that the red tiles of the roof would be scattered in
the air, to the great danger of the faithful worshippers.

On a neighbouring hill I perceived the national school, where, as I
was informed later by our host, were taught Hebrew, English, French,
and Danish, four languages of which, with shame I confess it, I don't
know a single word; after an examination I should have had to stand
last of the forty scholars educated at this little college, and I
should have been held unworthy to sleep along with them in one of
those little double closets, where more delicate youths would have
died of suffocation the very first night.

In three hours I had seen not only the town but its environs. The
general aspect was wonderfully dull. No trees, and scarcely any
vegetation. Everywhere bare rocks, signs of volcanic action. The
Icelandic huts are made of earth and turf, and the walls slope
inward; they rather resemble roofs placed on the ground. But then
these roofs are meadows of comparative fertility. Thanks to the
internal heat, the grass grows on them to some degree of perfection.
It is carefully mown in the hay season; if it were not, the horses
would come to pasture on these green abodes.

In my excursion I met but few people. On returning to the main street
I found the greater part of the population busied in drying, salting,
and putting on board codfish, their chief export. The men looked like
robust but heavy, blond Germans with pensive eyes, conscious of being
far removed from their fellow creatures, poor exiles relegated to
this land of ice, poor creatures who should have been Esquimaux,
since nature had condemned them to live only just outside the arctic
circle! In vain did I try to detect a smile upon their lips;
sometimes by a spasmodic and involuntary contraction of the muscles
they seemed to laugh, but they never smiled.

Their costume consisted of a coarse jacket of black woollen cloth
called in Scandinavian lands a 'vadmel,' a hat with a very broad
brim, trousers with a narrow edge of red, and a bit of leather rolled
round the foot for shoes.

The women looked as sad and as resigned as the men; their faces were
agreeable but expressionless, and they wore gowns and petticoats of
dark 'vadmel'; as maidens, they wore over their braided hair a little
knitted brown cap; when married, they put around their heads a
coloured handkerchief, crowned with a peak of white linen.

After a good walk I returned to M. Fridrikssen's house, where I found
my uncle already in his host's company.




CHAPTER X.

INTERESTING CONVERSATIONS WITH ICELANDIC SAVANTS


Dinner was ready. Professor Liedenbrock devoured his portion
voraciously, for his compulsory fast on board had converted his
stomach into a vast unfathomable gulf. There was nothing remarkable
in the meal itself; but the hospitality of our host, more Danish than
Icelandic, reminded me of the heroes of old. It was evident that we
were more at home than he was himself.

The conversation was carried on in the vernacular tongue, which my
uncle mixed with German and M. Fridrikssen with Latin for my benefit.
It turned upon scientific questions as befits philosophers; but
Professor Liedenbrock was excessively reserved, and at every sentence
spoke to me with his eyes, enjoining the most absolute silence upon
our plans.

In the first place M. Fridrikssen wanted to know what success my
uncle had had at the library.

"Your library! why there is nothing but a few tattered books upon
almost deserted shelves."

"Indeed!" replied M. Fridrikssen, "why we possess eight thousand
volumes, many of them valuable and scarce, works in the old
Scandinavian language, and we have all the novelties that Copenhagen
sends us every year."

"Where do you keep your eight thousand volumes? For my part--"

"Oh, M. Liedenbrock, they are all over the country. In this icy
region we are fond of study. There is not a farmer nor a fisherman
that cannot read and does not read. Our principle is, that books,
instead of growing mouldy behind an iron grating, should be worn out
under the eyes of many readers. Therefore, these volumes are passed
from one to another, read over and over, referred to again and again;
and it often happens that they find their way back to their shelves
only after an absence of a year or two."

"And in the meantime," said my uncle rather spitefully, "strangers--"

"Well, what would you have? Foreigners have their libraries at home,
and the first essential for labouring people is that they should be
educated. I repeat to you the love of reading runs in Icelandic
blood. In 1816 we founded a prosperous literary society; learned
strangers think themselves honoured in becoming members of it. It
publishes books which educate our fellow-countrymen, and do the
country great service. If you will consent to be a corresponding
member, Herr Liedenbrock, you will be giving us great pleasure."

My uncle, who had already joined about a hundred learned societies,
accepted with a grace which evidently touched M. Fridrikssen.

"Now," said he, "will you be kind enough to tell me what books you
hoped to find in our library and I may perhaps enable you to consult
them?"

My uncle's eyes and mine met. He hesitated. This direct question went
to the root of the matter. But after a moment's reflection he decided
on speaking.

"Monsieur Fridrikssen, I wished to know if amongst your ancient books
you possessed any of the works of Arne Saknussemm?"

"Arne Saknussemm!" replied the Rejkiavik professor. "You mean that
learned sixteenth century savant, a naturalist, a chemist, and a
traveller?"

"Just so!"

"One of the glories of Icelandic literature and science?"

"That's the man."

"An illustrious man anywhere!"

"Quite so."

"And whose courage was equal to his genius!"

"I see that you know him well."

My uncle was bathed in delight at hearing his hero thus described. He
feasted his eyes upon M. Fridrikssen's face.

"Well," he cried, "where are his works?"

"His works, we have them not."

"What--not in Iceland?"

"They are neither in Iceland nor anywhere else."

"Why is that?"

"Because Arne Saknussemm was persecuted for heresy, and in 1573 his
books were burned by the hands of the common hangman."

"Very good! Excellent!" cried my uncle, to the great scandal of the
professor of natural history.

"What!" he cried.

"Yes, yes; now it is all clear, now it is all unravelled; and I see
why Saknussemm, put into the Index Expurgatorius, and compelled to
hide the discoveries made by his genius, was obliged to bury in an
incomprehensible cryptogram the secret--"

"What secret?" asked M. Fridrikssen, starting.

"Oh, just a secret which--" my uncle stammered.

"Have you some private document in your possession?" asked our host.

"No; I was only supposing a case."

"Oh, very well," answered M. Fridrikssen, who was kind enough not to
pursue the subject when he had noticed the embarrassment of his
friend. "I hope you will not leave our island until you have seen
some of its mineralogical wealth."

"Certainly," replied my uncle; "but I am rather late; or have not
others been here before me?"

"Yes, Herr Liedenbrock; the labours of MM. Olafsen and Povelsen,
pursued by order of the king, the researches of Trol the scientific
mission of MM. Gaimard and Robert on the French corvette _La
Recherche,_ [1] and lately the observations of scientific men who
came in the _Reine Hortense,_ have added materially to our knowledge
of Iceland. But I assure you there is plenty left."

"Do you think so?" said my uncle, pretending to look very modest, and
trying to hide the curiosity was flashing out of his eyes.

"Oh, yes; how many mountains, glaciers, and volcanoes there are to
study, which are as yet but imperfectly known! Then, without going
any further, that mountain in the horizon. That is Snfell."

"Ah!" said my uncle, as coolly as he was able, "is that Snfell?"

"Yes; one of the most curious volcanoes, and the crater of which has
scarcely ever been visited."

"Is it extinct?"

"Oh, yes; more than five hundred years."

"Well," replied my uncle, who was frantically locking his legs together
to keep himself from jumping up in the air, "that is where I mean to
begin my geological studies, there on that Seffel--Fessel--what do you
call it?"

"Snfell," replied the excellent M. Fridrikssen.

This part of the conversation was in Latin; I had understood every
word of it, and I could hardly conceal my amusement at seeing my
uncle trying to keep down the excitement and satisfaction which were
brimming over in every limb and every feature. He tried hard to put
on an innocent little expression of simplicity; but it looked like a
diabolical grin.

[1] _Recherche_ was sent out in 1835 by Admiral Duperr to learn the
fate of the lost expedition of M. de Blosseville in the _Lilloise_
which has never been heard of.

"Yes," said he, "your words decide me. We will try to scale that
Snfell; perhaps even we may pursue our studies in its crater!"

"I am very sorry," said M. Fridrikssen, "that my engagements will not
allow me to absent myself, or I would have accompanied you myself
with both pleasure and profit."

"Oh, no, no!" replied my uncle with great animation, "we would not
disturb any one for the world, M. Fridrikssen. Still, I thank you
with all my heart: the company of such a talented man would have been
very serviceable, but the duties of your profession--"

I am glad to think that our host, in the innocence of his Icelandic
soul, was blind to the transparent artifices of my uncle.

"I very much approve of your beginning with that volcano, M.
Liedenbrock. You will gather a harvest of interesting observations.
But, tell me, how do you expect to get to the peninsula of Snfell?"

"By sea, crossing the bay. That's the most direct way."

"No doubt; but it is impossible."

"Why?"

"Because we don't possess a single boat at Rejkiavik."

"You don't mean to say so?"

"You will have to go by land, following the shore. It will be longer,
but more interesting."

"Very well, then; and now I shall have to see about a guide."

"I have one to offer you."

"A safe, intelligent man."

"Yes; an inhabitant of that peninsula. He is an eider-down hunter, and
very clever. He speaks Danish perfectly."

"When can I see him?"

"To-morrow, if you like."

"Why not to-day?"

"Because he won't be here till to-morrow."

"To-morrow, then," added my uncle with a sigh.

This momentous conversation ended in a few minutes with warm
acknowledgments paid by the German to the Icelandic Professor. At
this dinner my uncle had just elicited important facts, amongst
others, the history of Saknussemm, the reason of the mysterious
document, that his host would not accompany him in his expedition,
and that the very next day a guide would be waiting upon him.




CHAPTER XI.

A GUIDE FOUND TO THE CENTRE OF THE EARTH


In the evening I took a short walk on the beach and returned at night
to my plank-bed, where I slept soundly all night.

When I awoke I heard my uncle talking at a great rate in the next
room. I immediately dressed and joined him.

He was conversing in the Danish language with a tall man, of robust
build. This fine fellow must have been possessed of great strength.
His eyes, set in a large and ingenuous face, seemed to me very
intelligent; they were of a dreamy sea-blue. Long hair, which would
have been called red even in England, fell in long meshes upon his
broad shoulders. The movements of this native were lithe and supple;
but he made little use of his arms in speaking, like a man who knew
nothing or cared nothing about the language of gestures. His whole
appearance bespoke perfect calmness and self-possession, not
indolence but tranquillity. It was felt at once that he would be
beholden to nobody, that he worked for his own convenience, and that
nothing in this world could astonish or disturb his philosophic
calmness.

I caught the shades of this Icelander's character by the way in which
he listened to the impassioned flow of words which fell from the
Professor. He stood with arms crossed, perfectly unmoved by my
uncle's incessant gesticulations. A negative was expressed by a slow
movement of the head from left to right, an affirmative by a slight
bend, so slight that his long hair scarcely moved. He carried economy
of motion even to parsimony.

Certainly I should never have dreamt in looking at this man that he
was a hunter; he did not look likely to frighten his game, nor did he
seem as if he would even get near it. But the mystery was explained
when M. Fridrikssen informed me that this tranquil personage was only
a hunter of the eider duck, whose under plumage constitutes the chief
wealth of the island. This is the celebrated eider down, and it
requires no great rapidity of movement to get it.

Early in summer the female, a very pretty bird, goes to build her
nest among the rocks of the fiords with which the coast is fringed.
After building the nest she feathers it with down plucked from her
own breast. Immediately the hunter, or rather the trader, comes and
robs the nest, and the female recommences her work. This goes on as
long as she has any down left. When she has stripped herself bare the
male takes his turn to pluck himself. But as the coarse and hard
plumage of the male has no commercial value, the hunter does not take
the trouble to rob the nest of this; the female therefore lays her
eggs in the spoils of her mate, the young are hatched, and next year
the harvest begins again.

Now, as the eider duck does not select steep cliffs for her nest, but
rather the smooth terraced rocks which slope to the sea, the
Icelandic hunter might exercise his calling without any inconvenient
exertion. He was a farmer who was not obliged either to sow or reap
his harvest, but merely to gather it in.

This grave, phlegmatic, and silent individual was called Hans Bjelke;
and he came recommended by M. Fridrikssen. He was our future guide.
His manners were a singular contrast with my uncle's.

Nevertheless, they soon came to understand each other. Neither looked
at the amount of the payment: the one was ready to accept whatever
was offered; the other was ready to give whatever was demanded. Never
was bargain more readily concluded.

The result of the treaty was, that Hans engaged on his part to
conduct us to the village of Stapi, on the south shore of the Snfell
peninsula, at the very foot of the volcano. By land this would be
about twenty-two miles, to be done, said my uncle, in two days.

But when he learnt that the Danish mile was 24,000 feet long, he was
obliged to modify his calculations and allow seven or eight days for
the march.

Four horses were to be placed at our disposal--two to carry him and
me, two for the baggage. Hams, as was his custom, would go on foot.
He knew all that part of the coast perfectly, and promised to take us
the shortest way.

His engagement was not to terminate with our arrival at Stapi; he was
to continue in my uncle's service for the whole period of his
scientific researches, for the remuneration of three rixdales a week
(about twelve shillings), but it was an express article of the
covenant that his wages should be counted out to him every Saturday
at six o'clock in the evening, which, according to him, was one
indispensable part of the engagement.

The start was fixed for the 16th of June. My uncle wanted to pay the
hunter a portion in advance, but he refused with one word:

"_Efter,_" said he.

"After," said the Professor for my edification.

The treaty concluded, Hans silently withdrew.

"A famous fellow," cried my uncle; "but he little thinks of the
marvellous part he has to play in the future."

"So he is to go with us as far as--"

"As far as the centre of the earth, Axel."

Forty-eight hours were left before our departure; to my great regret
I had to employ them in preparations; for all our ingenuity was
required to pack every article to the best advantage; instruments
here, arms there, tools in this package, provisions in that: four
sets of packages in all.

The instruments were:

1. An Eigel's centigrade thermometer, graduated up to 150 degrees
(302 degrees Fahr.), which seemed to me too much or too little. Too
much if the internal heat was to rise so high, for in this case we
should be baked, not enough to measure the temperature of springs or
any matter in a state of fusion.

2. An aneroid barometer, to indicate extreme pressures of the
atmosphere. An ordinary barometer would not have answered the
purpose, as the pressure would increase during our descent to a point
which the mercurial barometer [1] would not register.

3. A chronometer, made by Boissonnas, jun., of Geneva, accurately set
to the meridian of Hamburg.

4. Two compasses, viz., a common compass and a dipping needle.

5. A night glass.

6. Two of Ruhmkorff's apparatus, which, by means of an electric
current, supplied a safe and handy portable light [2]

The arms consisted of two of Purdy's rifles and two brace of pistols.
But what did we want arms for? We had neither savages nor wild beasts
to fear, I supposed. But my uncle seemed to believe in his arsenal as
in his instruments, and more especially in a considerable quantity of
gun cotton, which is unaffected by moisture, and the explosive force
of which exceeds that of gunpowder.

[1] In M. Verne's book a 'manometer' is the instrument used, of which
very little is known. In a complete list of philosophical instruments
the translator cannot find the name. As he is assured by a first-rate
instrument maker, Chadburn, of Liverpool, that an aneroid can be
constructed to measure any depth, he has thought it best to furnish
the adventurous professor with this more familiar instrument. The
'manometer' is generally known as a pressure gauge.--TRANS.

[2] Ruhmkorff's apparatus consists of a Bunsen pile worked with
bichromate of potash, which makes no smell; an induction coil carries
the electricity generated by the pile into communication with a
lantern of peculiar construction; in this lantern there is a spiral
glass tube from which the air has been excluded, and in which remains
only a residuum of carbonic acid gas or of nitrogen. When the
apparatus is put in action this gas becomes luminous, producing a
white steady light. The pile and coil are placed in a leathern bag
which the traveller carries over his shoulders; the lantern outside
of the bag throws sufficient light into deep darkness; it enables one
to venture without fear of explosions into the midst of the most
inflammable gases, and is not extinguished even in the deepest
waters. M. Ruhmkorff is a learned and most ingenious man of science;
his great discovery is his induction coil, which produces a powerful
stream of electricity. He obtained in 1864 the quinquennial prize of
50,000 franc reserved by the French government for the most ingenious
application of electricity.

The tools comprised two pickaxes, two spades, a silk ropeladder,
three iron-tipped sticks, a hatchet, a hammer, a dozen wedges and
iron spikes, and a long knotted rope. Now this was a large load, for
the ladder was 300 feet long.

And there were provisions too: this was not a large parcel, but it
was comforting to know that of essence of beef and biscuits there
were six months' consumption. Spirits were the only liquid, and of
water we took none; but we had flasks, and my uncle depended on
springs from which to fill them. Whatever objections I hazarded as to
their quality, temperature, and even absence, remained ineffectual.

To complete the exact inventory of all our travelling accompaniments,
I must not forget a pocket medicine chest, containing blunt scissors,
splints for broken limbs, a piece of tape of unbleached linen,
bandages and compresses, lint, a lancet for bleeding, all dreadful
articles to take with one. Then there was a row of phials containing
dextrine, alcoholic ether, liquid acetate of lead, vinegar, and
ammonia drugs which afforded me no comfort. Finally, all the articles
needful to supply Ruhmkorff's apparatus.

My uncle did not forget a supply of tobacco, coarse grained powder,
and amadou, nor a leathern belt in which he carried a sufficient
quantity of gold, silver, and paper money. Six pairs of boots and
shoes, made waterproof with a composition of indiarubber and naphtha,
were packed amongst the tools.

"Clothed, shod, and equipped like this," said my uncle, "there is no
telling how far we may go."

The 14th was wholly spent in arranging all our different articles. In
the evening we dined with Baron Tramps; the mayor of Rejkiavik, and
Dr. Hyaltalin, the first medical man of the place, being of the
party. M. Fridrikssen was not there. I learned afterwards that he and
the Governor disagreed upon some question of administration, and did
not speak to each other. I therefore knew not a single word of all
that was said at this semi-official dinner; but I could not help
noticing that my uncle talked the whole time.

On the 15th our preparations were all made. Our host gave the
Professor very great pleasure by presenting him with a map of Iceland
far more complete than that of Hendersen. It was the map of M. Olaf
Nikolas Olsen, in the proportion of 1 to 480,000 of the actual size
of the island, and published by the Icelandic Literary Society. It
was a precious document for a mineralogist.

Our last evening was spent in intimate conversation with M.
Fridrikssen, with whom I felt the liveliest sympathy; then, after the
talk, succeeded, for me, at any rate, a disturbed and restless night.

At five in the morning I was awoke by the neighing and pawing of four
horses under my window. I dressed hastily and came down into the
street. Hans was finishing our packing, almost as it were without
moving a limb; and yet he did his work cleverly. My uncle made more
noise than execution, and the guide seemed to pay very little
attention to his energetic directions.

At six o'clock our preparations were over. M. Fridrikssen shook hands
with us. My uncle thanked him heartily for his extreme kindness. I
constructed a few fine Latin sentences to express my cordial
farewell. Then we bestrode our steeds and with his last adieu M.
Fridrikssen treated me to a line of Virgil eminently applicable to
such uncertain wanderers as we were likely to be:

"Et quacumque viam dedent fortuna sequamur."

"Therever fortune clears a way,
Thither our ready footsteps stray."




CHAPTER XII.

A BARREN LAND


We had started under a sky overcast but calm. There was no fear of
heat, none of disastrous rain. It was just the weather for tourists.

The pleasure of riding on horseback over an unknown country made me
easy to be pleased at our first start. I threw myself wholly into the
pleasure of the trip, and enjoyed the feeling of freedom and
satisfied desire. I was beginning to take a real share in the
enterprise.

"Besides," I said to myself, "where's the risk? Here we are
travelling all through a most interesting country! We are about to
climb a very remarkable mountain; at the worst we are going to
scramble down an extinct crater. It is evident that Saknussemm did
nothing more than this. As for a passage leading to the centre of the
globe, it is mere rubbish! perfectly impossible! Very well, then; let
us get all the good we can out of this expedition, and don't let us
haggle about the chances."

This reasoning having settled my mind, we got out of Rejkiavik.

Hans moved steadily on, keeping ahead of us at an even, smooth, and
rapid pace. The baggage horses followed him without giving any
trouble. Then came my uncle and myself, looking not so very
ill-mounted on our small but hardy animals.

Iceland is one of the largest islands in Europe. Its surface is
14,000 square miles, and it contains but 16,000 inhabitants.
Geographers have divided it into four quarters, and we were crossing
diagonally the south-west quarter, called the 'Sudvester Fjordungr.'

On leaving Rejkiavik Hans took us by the seashore. We passed lean
pastures which were trying very hard, but in vain, to look green;
yellow came out best. The rugged peaks of the trachyte rocks
presented faint outlines on the eastern horizon; at times a few
patches of snow, concentrating the vague light, glittered upon the
slopes of the distant mountains; certain peaks, boldly uprising,
passed through the grey clouds, and reappeared above the moving
mists, like breakers emerging in the heavens.

Often these chains of barren rocks made a dip towards the sea, and
encroached upon the scanty pasturage: but there was always enough
room to pass. Besides, our horses instinctively chose the easiest
places without ever slackening their pace. My uncle was refused even
the satisfaction of stirring up his beast with whip or voice. He had
no excuse for being impatient. I could not help smiling to see so
tall a man on so small a pony, and as his long legs nearly touched
the ground he looked like a six-legged centaur.

"Good horse! good horse!" he kept saying. "You will see, Axel, that
there is no more sagacious animal than the Icelandic horse. He is
stopped by neither snow, nor storm, nor impassable roads, nor rocks,
glaciers, or anything. He is courageous, sober, and surefooted. He
never makes a false step, never shies. If there is a river or fiord
to cross (and we shall meet with many) you will see him plunge in at
once, just as if he were amphibious, and gain the opposite bank. But
we must not hurry him; we must let him have his way, and we shall get
on at the rate of thirty miles a day."

"We may; but how about our guide?"

"Oh, never mind him. People like him get over the ground without a
thought. There is so little action in this man that he will never get
tired; and besides, if he wants it, he shall have my horse. I shall
get cramped if I don't have a little action. The arms are all right,
but the legs want exercise."

We were advancing at a rapid pace. The country was already almost a
desert. Here and there was a lonely farm, called a bor built either
of wood, or of sods, or of pieces of lava, looking like a poor beggar
by the wayside. These ruinous huts seemed to solicit charity from
passers-by; and on very small provocation we should have given alms
for the relief of the poor inmates. In this country there were no
roads and paths, and the poor vegetation, however slow, would soon
efface the rare travellers' footsteps.

Yet this part of the province, at a very small distance from the
capital, is reckoned among the inhabited and cultivated portions of
Iceland. What, then, must other tracts be, more desert than this
desert? In the first half mile we had not seen one farmer standing
before his cabin door, nor one shepherd tending a flock less wild
than himself, nothing but a few cows and sheep left to themselves.
What then would be those convulsed regions upon which we were
advancing, regions subject to the dire phenomena of eruptions, the
offspring of volcanic explosions and subterranean convulsions?

We were to know them before long, but on consulting Olsen's map, I
saw that they would be avoided by winding along the seashore. In
fact, the great plutonic action is confined to the central portion of
the island; there, rocks of the trappean and volcanic class,
including trachyte, basalt, and tuffs and agglomerates associated
with streams of lava, have made this a land of supernatural horrors.
I had no idea of the spectacle which was awaiting us in the peninsula
of Snfell, where these ruins of a fiery nature have formed a
frightful chaos.

In two hours from Rejkiavik we arrived at the burgh of Gufunes,
called Aolkirkja, or principal church. There was nothing remarkable
here but a few houses, scarcely enough for a German hamlet.

Hans stopped here half an hour. He shared with us our frugal
breakfast; answering my uncle's questions about the road and our
resting place that night with merely yes or no, except when he said
"Gardr."

I consulted the map to see where Gardr was. I saw there was a small
town of that name on the banks of the Hvalfiord, four miles from
Rejkiavik. I showed it to my uncle.

"Four miles only!" he exclaimed; "four miles out of twenty-eight.
What a nice little walk!"

He was about to make an observation to the guide, who without
answering resumed his place at the head, and went on his way.

Three hours later, still treading on the colourless grass of the
pasture land, we had to work round the Kolla fiord, a longer way but
an easier one than across that inlet. We soon entered into a
'pingstaoer' or parish called Ejulberg, from whose steeple twelve
o'clock would have struck, if Icelandic churches were rich enough to
possess clocks. But they are like the parishioners who have no
watches and do without.

There our horses were baited; then taking the narrow path to left
between a chain of hills and the sea, they carried us to our next
stage, the aolkirkja of Brantr and one mile farther on, to Saurbor
'Annexia,' a chapel of ease built on the south shore of the Hvalfiord.

It was now four o'clock, and we had gone four Icelandic miles, or
twenty-four English miles.

In that place the fiord was at least three English miles wide; the
waves rolled with a rushing din upon the sharp-pointed rocks; this
inlet was confined between walls of rock, precipices crowned by sharp
peaks 2,000 feet high, and remarkable for the brown strata which
separated the beds of reddish tuff. However much I might respect the
intelligence of our quadrupeds, I hardly cared to put it to the test
by trusting myself to it on horseback across an arm of the sea.

If they are as intelligent as they are said to be, I thought, they
won't try it. In any case, I will tax my intelligence to direct
theirs.

But my uncle would not wait. He spurred on to the edge. His steed
lowered his head to examine the nearest waves and stopped. My uncle,
who had an instinct of his own, too, applied pressure, and was again
refused by the animal significantly shaking his head. Then followed
strong language, and the whip; but the brute answered these arguments
with kicks and endeavours to throw his rider. At last the clever
little pony, with a bend of his knees, started from under the
Professor's legs, and left him standing upon two boulders on the
shore just like the colossus of Rhodes.

"Confounded brute!" cried the unhorsed horseman, suddenly degraded
into a pedestrian, just as ashamed as a cavalry officer degraded to a
foot soldier.

"_Frja,_" said the guide, touching his shoulder.

"What! a boat?"

"_Der,_" replied Hans, pointing to one.

"Yes," I cried; "there is a boat."

"Why did not you say so then? Well, let us go on."

"_Tidvatten,_" said the guide.

"What is he saying?"

"He says tide," said my uncle, translating the Danish word.

"No doubt we must wait for the tide."

"_Frbida,_" said my uncle.

"_Ja,_" replied Hans.

My uncle stamped with his foot, while the horses went on to the boat.

I perfectly understood the necessity of abiding a particular moment
of the tide to undertake the crossing of the fiord, when, the sea
having reached its greatest height, it should be slack water. Then
the ebb and flow have no sensible effect, and the boat does not risk
being carried either to the bottom or out to sea.

That favourable moment arrived only with six o'clock; when my uncle,
myself, the guide, two other passengers and the four horses, trusted
ourselves to a somewhat fragile raft. Accustomed as I was to the
swift and sure steamers on the Elbe, I found the oars of the rowers
rather a slow means of propulsion. It took us more than an hour to
cross the fiord; but the passage was effected without any mishap.

In another half hour we had reached the aolkirkja of Gardr




CHAPTER XIII.

HOSPITALITY UNDER THE ARCTIC CIRCLE


It ought to have been night-time, but under the 65th parallel there
was nothing surprising in the nocturnal polar light. In Iceland
during the months of June and July the sun does not set.

But the temperature was much lower. I was cold and more hungry than
cold. Welcome was the sight of the bor which was hospitably opened
to receive us.

It was a peasant's house, but in point of hospitality it was equal to
a king's. On our arrival the master came with outstretched hands, and
without more ceremony he beckoned us to follow him.

To accompany him down the long, narrow, dark passage, would have been
impossible. Therefore, we followed, as he bid us. The building was
constructed of roughly squared timbers, with rooms on both sides,
four in number, all opening out into the one passage: these were the
kitchen, the weaving shop, the badstofa, or family sleeping-room, and
the visitors' room, which was the best of all. My uncle, whose height
had not been thought of in building the house, of course hit his head
several times against the beams that projected from the ceilings.

We were introduced into our apartment, a large room with a floor of
earth stamped hard down, and lighted by a window, the panes of which
were formed of sheep's bladder, not admitting too much light. The
sleeping accommodation consisted of dry litter, thrown into two
wooden frames painted red, and ornamented with Icelandic sentences. I
was hardly expecting so much comfort; the only discomfort proceeded
from the strong odour of dried fish, hung meat, and sour milk, of
which my nose made bitter complaints.

When we had laid aside our travelling wraps the voice of the host was
heard inviting us to the kitchen, the only room where a fire was
lighted even in the severest cold.

My uncle lost no time in obeying the friendly call, nor was I slack
in following.

The kitchen chimney was constructed on the ancient pattern; in the
middle of the room was a stone for a hearth, over it in the roof a
hole to let the smoke escape. The kitchen was also a dining-room.

At our entrance the host, as if he had never seen us, greeted us with
the word "_Sllvertu,_" which means "be happy," and came and kissed
us on the cheek.

After him his wife pronounced the same words, accompanied with the
same ceremonial; then the two placing their hands upon their hearts,
inclined profoundly before us.

I hasten to inform the reader that this Icelandic lady was the mother
of nineteen children, all, big and little, swarming in the midst of
the dense wreaths of smoke with which the fire on the hearth filled
the chamber. Every moment I noticed a fair-haired and rather
melancholy face peeping out of the rolling volumes of smoke--they
were a perfect cluster of unwashed angels.

My uncle and I treated this little tribe with kindness; and in a very
short time we each had three or four of these brats on our shoulders,
as many on our laps, and the rest between our knees. Those who could
speak kept repeating "_Sllvertu,_" in every conceivable tone; those
that could not speak made up for that want by shrill cries.

This concert was brought to a close by the announcement of dinner. At
that moment our hunter returned, who had been seeing his horses
provided for; that is to say, he had economically let them loose in
the fields, where the poor beasts had to content themselves with the
scanty moss they could pull off the rocks and a few meagre sea weeds,
and the next day they would not fail to come of themselves and resume
the labours of the previous day.

"_Sllvertu,_" said Hans.

Then calmly, automatically, and dispassionately he kissed the host,
the hostess, and their nineteen children.

This ceremony over, we sat at table, twenty-four in number, and
therefore one upon another. The luckiest had only two urchins upon
their knees.

But silence reigned in all this little world at the arrival of the
soup, and the national taciturnity resumed its empire even over the
children. The host served out to us a soup made of lichen and by no
means unpleasant, then an immense piece of dried fish floating in
butter rancid with twenty years' keeping, and, therefore, according
to Icelandic gastronomy, much preferable to fresh butter. Along with
this, we had 'skye,' a sort of clotted milk, with biscuits, and a
liquid prepared from juniper berries; for beverage we had a thin milk
mixed with water, called in this country 'blanda.' It is not for me
to decide whether this diet is wholesome or not; all I can say is,
that I was desperately hungry, and that at dessert I swallowed to the
very last gulp of a thick broth made from buckwheat.

As soon as the meal was over the children disappeared, and their
elders gathered round the peat fire, which also burnt such
miscellaneous fuel as briars, cow-dung, and fishbones. After this
little pinch of warmth the different groups retired to their
respective rooms. Our hostess hospitably offered us her assistance in
undressing, according to Icelandic usage; but on our gracefully
declining, she insisted no longer, and I was able at last to curl
myself up in my mossy bed.

At five next morning we bade our host farewell, my uncle with
difficulty persuading him to accept a proper remuneration; and Hans
signalled the start.

At a hundred yards from Gardr the soil began to change its aspect;
it became boggy and less favourable to progress. On our right the
chain of mountains was indefinitely prolonged like an immense system
of natural fortifications, of which we were following the
counter-scarp or lesser steep; often we were met by streams, which we
had to ford with great care, not to wet our packages.

The desert became wider and more hideous; yet from time to time we
seemed to descry a human figure that fled at our approach, sometimes
a sharp turn would bring us suddenly within a short distance of one
of these spectres, and I was filled with loathing at the sight of a
huge deformed head, the skin shining and hairless, and repulsive
sores visible through the gaps in the poor creature's wretched rags.

The unhappy being forbore to approach us and offer his misshapen
hand. He fled away, but not before Hans had saluted him with the
customary "_Sllvertu._"

"_Spetelsk,_" said he.

"A leper!" my uncle repeated.

This word produced a repulsive effect. The horrible disease of
leprosy is too common in Iceland; it is not contagious, but
hereditary, and lepers are forbidden to marry.

These apparitions were not cheerful, and did not throw any charm over
the less and less attractive landscapes. The last tufts of grass had
disappeared from beneath our feet. Not a tree was to be seen, unless
we except a few dwarf birches as low as brushwood. Not an animal but
a few wandering ponies that their owners would not feed. Sometimes we
could see a hawk balancing himself on his wings under the grey cloud,
and then darting away south with rapid flight. I felt melancholy
under this savage aspect of nature, and my thoughts went away to the
cheerful scenes I had left in the far south.

We had to cross a few narrow fiords, and at last quite a wide gulf;
the tide, then high, allowed us to pass over without delay, and to
reach the hamlet of Alftanes, one mile beyond.

That evening, after having forded two rivers full of trout and pike,
called Alfa and Heta, we were obliged to spend the night in a
deserted building worthy to be haunted by all the elfins of
Scandinavia. The ice king certainly held court here, and gave us all
night long samples of what he could do.

No particular event marked the next day. Bogs, dead levels,
melancholy desert tracks, wherever we travelled. By nightfall we had
accomplished half our journey, and we lay at Krsolbt.

On the 19th of June, for about a mile, that is an Icelandic mile, we
walked upon hardened lava; this ground is called in the country
'hraun'; the writhen surface presented the appearance of distorted,
twisted cables, sometimes stretched in length, sometimes contorted
together; an immense torrent, once liquid, now solid, ran from the
nearest mountains, now extinct volcanoes, but the ruins around
revealed the violence of the past eruptions. Yet here and there were
a few jets of steam from hot springs.

We had no time to watch these phenomena; we had to proceed on our
way. Soon at the foot of the mountains the boggy land reappeared,
intersected by little lakes. Our route now lay westward; we had
turned the great bay of Faxa, and the twin peaks of Snfell rose
white into the cloudy sky at the distance of at least five miles.

The horses did their duty well, no difficulties stopped them in their
steady career. I was getting tired; but my uncle was as firm and
straight as he was at our first start. I could not help admiring his
persistency, as well as the hunter's, who treated our expedition like
a mere promenade.

June 20. At six p.m. we reached Bdir, a village on the sea shore;
and the guide there claiming his due, my uncle settled with him. It
was Hans' own family, that is, his uncles and cousins, who gave us
hospitality; we were kindly received, and without taxing too much the
goodness of these folks, I would willingly have tarried here to
recruit after my fatigues. But my uncle, who wanted no recruiting,
would not hear of it, and the next morning we had to bestride our
beasts again.

The soil told of the neighbourhood of the mountain, whose granite
foundations rose from the earth like the knotted roots of some huge
oak. We were rounding the immense base of the volcano. The Professor
hardly took his eyes off it. He tossed up his arms and seemed to defy
it, and to declare, "There stands the giant that I shall conquer."
After about four hours' walking the horses stopped of their own
accord at the door of the priest's house at Stapi.




CHAPTER XIV.

BUT ARCTICS CAN BE INHOSPITABLE, TOO


Stapi is a village consisting of about thirty huts, built of lava, at
the south side of the base of the volcano. It extends along the inner
edge of a small fiord, inclosed between basaltic walls of the
strangest construction.

Basalt is a brownish rock of igneous origin. It assumes regular
forms, the arrangement of which is often very surprising. Here nature
had done her work geometrically, with square and compass and plummet.
Everywhere else her art consists alone in throwing down huge masses
together in disorder. You see cones imperfectly formed, irregular
pyramids, with a fantastic disarrangement of lines; but here, as if
to exhibit an example of regularity, though in advance of the very
earliest architects, she has created a severely simple order of
architecture, never surpassed either by the splendours of Babylon or
the wonders of Greece.

I had heard of the Giant's Causeway in Ireland, and Fingal's Cave in
Staffa, one of the Hebrides; but I had never yet seen a basaltic
formation.

At Stapi I beheld this phenomenon in all its beauty.

The wall that confined the fiord, like all the coast of the
peninsula, was composed of a series of vertical columns thirty feet
high. These straight shafts, of fair proportions, supported an
architrave of horizontal slabs, the overhanging portion of which
formed a semi-arch over the sea. At intervals, under this natural
shelter, there spread out vaulted entrances in beautiful curves, into
which the waves came dashing with foam and spray. A few shafts of
basalt, torn from their hold by the fury of tempests, lay along the
soil like remains of an ancient temple, in ruins for ever fresh, and
over which centuries passed without leaving a trace of age upon them.

This was our last stage upon the earth. Hans had exhibited great
intelligence, and it gave me some little comfort to think then that
he was not going to leave us.

On arriving at the door of the rector's house, which was not
different from the others, I saw a man shoeing a horse, hammer in
hand, and with a leathern apron on.

"_Sllvertu,_" said the hunter.

"_God dag,_" said the blacksmith in good Danish.

"_Kyrkoherde,_" said Hans, turning round to my uncle.

"The rector," repeated the Professor. "It seems, Axel, that this good
man is the rector."

Our guide in the meanwhile was making the 'kyrkoherde' aware of the
position of things; when the latter, suspending his labours for a
moment, uttered a sound no doubt understood between horses and
farriers, and immediately a tall and ugly hag appeared from the hut.
She must have been six feet at the least. I was in great alarm lest
she should treat me to the Icelandic kiss; but there was no occasion
to fear, nor did she do the honours at all too gracefully.

The visitors' room seemed to me the worst in the whole cabin. It was
close, dirty, and evil smelling. But we had to be content. The rector
did not to go in for antique hospitality. Very far from it. Before
the day was over I saw that we had to do with a blacksmith, a
fisherman, a hunter, a joiner, but not at all with a minister of the
Gospel. To be sure, it was a week-day; perhaps on a Sunday he made
amends.

I don't mean to say anything against these poor priests, who after
all are very wretched. They receive from the Danish Government a
ridiculously small pittance, and they get from the parish the fourth
part of the tithe, which does not come to sixty marks a year (about
4). Hence the necessity to work for their livelihood; but after
fishing, hunting, and shoeing horses for any length of time, one soon
gets into the ways and manners of fishermen, hunters, and farriers,
and other rather rude and uncultivated people; and that evening I
found out that temperance was not among the virtues that
distinguished my host.

My uncle soon discovered what sort of a man he had to do with;
instead of a good and learned man he found a rude and coarse peasant.
He therefore resolved to commence the grand expedition at once, and
to leave this inhospitable parsonage. He cared nothing about fatigue,
and resolved to spend some days upon the mountain.

The preparations for our departure were therefore made the very day
after our arrival at Stapi. Hans hired the services of three
Icelanders to do the duty of the horses in the transport of the
burdens; but as soon as we had arrived at the crater these natives
were to turn back and leave us to our own devices. This was to be
clearly understood.

My uncle now took the opportunity to explain to Hans that it was his
intention to explore the interior of the volcano to its farthest
limits.

Hans merely nodded. There or elsewhere, down in the bowels of the
earth, or anywhere on the surface, all was alike to him. For my own
part the incidents of the journey had hitherto kept me amused, and
made me forgetful of coming evils; but now my fears again were
beginning to get the better of me. But what could I do? The place to
resist the Professor would have been Hamburg, not the foot of Snfell.

One thought, above all others, harassed and alarmed me; it was one
calculated to shake firmer nerves than mine.

Now, thought I, here we are, about to climb Snfell. Very good. We
will explore the crater. Very good, too, others have done as much
without dying for it. But that is not all. If there is a way to
penetrate into the very bowels of the island, if that ill-advised
Saknussemm has told a true tale, we shall lose our way amidst the
deep subterranean passages of this volcano. Now, there is no proof
that Snfell is extinct. Who can assure us that an eruption is not
brewing at this very moment? Does it follow that because the monster
has slept since 1229 he must therefore never awake again? And if he
wakes up presently, where shall we be?

It was worth while debating this question, and I did debate it. I
could not sleep for dreaming about eruptions. Now, the part of
ejected scoriae and ashes seemed to my mind a very rough one to act.

So, at last, when I could hold out no longer, I resolved to lay the
case before my uncle, as prudently and as cautiously as possible,
just under the form of an almost impossible hypothesis.

I went to him. I communicated my fears to him, and drew back a step
to give him room for the explosion which I knew must follow. But I
was mistaken.

"I was thinking of that," he replied with great simplicity.

What could those words mean?--Was he actually going to listen to
reason? Was he contemplating the abandonment of his plans? This was
too good to be true.

After a few moments' silence, during which I dared not question him,
he resumed:

"I was thinking of that. Ever since we arrived at Stapi I have been
occupied with the important question you have just opened, for we
must not be guilty of imprudence."

"No, indeed!" I replied with forcible emphasis.

"For six hundred years Snfell has been dumb; but he may speak again.
Now, eruptions are always preceded by certain well-known phenomena. I
have therefore examined the natives, I have studied external
appearances, and I can assure you, Axel, that there will be no
eruption."

At this positive affirmation I stood amazed and speechless.

"You don't doubt my word?" said my uncle. "Well, follow me."

I obeyed like an automaton. Coming out from the priest's house, the
Professor took a straight road, which, through an opening in the
basaltic wall, led away from the sea. We were soon in the open
country, if one may give that name to a vast extent of mounds of
volcanic products. This tract seemed crushed under a rain of enormous
ejected rocks of trap, basalt, granite, and all kinds of igneous
rocks.

Here and there I could see puffs and jets of steam curling up into
the air, called in Icelandic 'reykir,' issuing from thermal springs,
and indicating by their motion the volcanic energy underneath. This
seemed to justify my fears: But I fell from the height of my new-born
hopes when my uncle said:

"You see all these volumes of steam, Axel; well, they demonstrate
that we have nothing to fear from the fury of a volcanic eruption."

"Am I to believe that?" I cried.

"Understand this clearly," added the Professor. "At the approach of
an eruption these jets would redouble their activity, but disappear
altogether during the period of the eruption. For the elastic fluids,
being no longer under pressure, go off by way of the crater instead
of escaping by their usual passages through the fissures in the soil.
Therefore, if these vapours remain in their usual condition, if they
display no augmentation of force, and if you add to this the
observation that the wind and rain are not ceasing and being replaced
by a still and heavy atmosphere, then you may affirm that no eruption
is preparing."

"But--"

'No more; that is sufficient. When science has uttered her voice, let
babblers hold their peace.'

I returned to the parsonage, very crestfallen. My uncle had beaten me
with the weapons of science. Still I had one hope left, and this was,
that when we had reached the bottom of the crater it would be
impossible, for want of a passage, to go deeper, in spite of all the
Saknussemm's in Iceland.

I spent that whole night in one constant nightmare; in the heart of a
volcano, and from the deepest depths of the earth I saw myself tossed
up amongst the interplanetary spaces under the form of an eruptive
rock.

The next day, June 23, Hans was awaiting us with his companions
carrying provisions, tools, and instruments; two iron pointed sticks,
two rifles, and two shot belts were for my uncle and myself. Hans, as
a cautious man, had added to our luggage a leathern bottle full of
water, which, with that in our flasks, would ensure us a supply of
water for eight days.

It was nine in the morning. The priest and his tall Megra were
awaiting us at the door. We supposed they were standing there to bid
us a kind farewell. But the farewell was put in the unexpected form
of a heavy bill, in which everything was charged, even to the very
air we breathed in the pastoral house, infected as it was. This
worthy couple were fleecing us just as a Swiss innkeeper might have
done, and estimated their imperfect hospitality at the highest price.

My uncle paid without a remark: a man who is starting for the centre
of the earth need not be particular about a few rix dollars.

This point being settled, Hans gave the signal, and we soon left
Stapi behind us.




CHAPTER XV.

SNFELL AT LAST


Snfell is 5,000 feet high. Its double cone forms the limit of a
trachytic belt which stands out distinctly in the mountain system of
the island. From our starting point we could see the two peaks boldly
projected against the dark grey sky; I could see an enormous cap of
snow coming low down upon the giant's brow.

We walked in single file, headed by the hunter, who ascended by
narrow tracks, where two could not have gone abreast. There was
therefore no room for conversation.

After we had passed the basaltic wall of the fiord of Stapi we passed
over a vegetable fibrous peat bog, left from the ancient vegetation
of this peninsula. The vast quantity of this unworked fuel would be
sufficient to warm the whole population of Iceland for a century;
this vast turbary measured in certain ravines had in many places a
depth of seventy feet, and presented layers of carbonized remains of
vegetation alternating with thinner layers of tufaceous pumice.

As a true nephew of the Professor Liedenbrock, and in spite of my
dismal prospects, I could not help observing with interest the
mineralogical curiosities which lay about me as in a vast museum, and
I constructed for myself a complete geological account of Iceland.

This most curious island has evidently been projected from the bottom
of the sea at a comparatively recent date. Possibly, it may still be
subject to gradual elevation. If this is the case, its origin may
well be attributed to subterranean fires. Therefore, in this case,
the theory of Sir Humphry Davy, Saknussemm's document, and my uncle's
theories would all go off in smoke. This hypothesis led me to examine
with more attention the appearance of the surface, and I soon arrived
at a conclusion as to the nature of the forces which presided at its
birth.

Iceland, which is entirely devoid of alluvial soil, is wholly
composed of volcanic tufa, that is to say, an agglomeration of porous
rocks and stones. Before the volcanoes broke out it consisted of trap
rocks slowly upraised to the level of the sea by the action of
central forces. The internal fires had not yet forced their way
through.

But at a later period a wide chasm formed diagonally from south-west
to north-east, through which was gradually forced out the trachyte
which was to form a mountain chain. No violence accompanied this
change; the matter thrown out was in vast quantities, and the liquid
material oozing out from the abysses of the earth slowly spread in
extensive plains or in hillocky masses. To this period belong the
felspar, syenites, and porphyries.

But with the help of this outflow the thickness of the crust of the
island increased materially, and therefore also its powers of
resistance. It may easily be conceived what vast quantities of
elastic gases, what masses of molten matter accumulated beneath its
solid surface whilst no exit was practicable after the cooling of the
trachytic crust. Therefore a time would come when the elastic and
explosive forces of the imprisoned gases would upheave this ponderous
cover and drive out for themselves openings through tall chimneys.
Hence then the volcano would distend and lift up the crust, and then
burst through a crater suddenly formed at the summit or thinnest part
of the volcano.

To the eruption succeeded other volcanic phenomena. Through the
outlets now made first escaped the ejected basalt of which the plain
we had just left presented such marvellous specimens. We were moving
over grey rocks of dense and massive formation, which in cooling had
formed into hexagonal prisms. Everywhere around us we saw truncated
cones, formerly so many fiery mouths.

After the exhaustion of the basalt, the volcano, the power of which
grew by the extinction of the lesser craters, supplied an egress to
lava, ashes, and scoriae, of which I could see lengthened screes
streaming down the sides of the mountain like flowing hair.

Such was the succession of phenomena which produced Iceland, all
arising from the action of internal fire; and to suppose that the
mass within did not still exist in a state of liquid incandescence
was absurd; and nothing could surpass the absurdity of fancying that
it was possible to reach the earth's centre.

So I felt a little comforted as we advanced to the assault of Snfell.

The way was growing more and more arduous, the ascent steeper and
steeper; the loose fragments of rock trembled beneath us, and the
utmost care was needed to avoid dangerous falls.

Hans went on as quietly as if he were on level ground; sometimes he
disappeared altogether behind the huge blocks, then a shrill whistle
would direct us on our way to him. Sometimes he would halt, pick up a
few bits of stone, build them up into a recognisable form, and thus
made landmarks to guide us in our way back. A very wise precaution in
itself, but, as things turned out, quite useless.

Three hours' fatiguing march had only brought us to the base of the
mountain. There Hans bid us come to a halt, and a hasty breakfast was
served out. My uncle swallowed two mouthfuls at a time to get on
faster. But, whether he liked it or not, this was a rest as well as a
breakfast hour and he had to wait till it pleased our guide to move
on, which came to pass in an hour. The three Icelanders, just as
taciturn as their comrade the hunter, never spoke, and ate their
breakfasts in silence.

We were now beginning to scale the steep sides of Snfell. Its snowy
summit, by an optical illusion not unfrequent in mountains, seemed
close to us, and yet how many weary hours it took to reach it! The
stones, adhering by no soil or fibrous roots of vegetation, rolled
away from under our feet, and rushed down the precipice below with
the swiftness of an avalanche.

At some places the flanks of the mountain formed an angle with the
horizon of at least 36 degrees; it was impossible to climb them, and
these stony cliffs had to be tacked round, not without great
difficulty. Then we helped each other with our sticks.

I must admit that my uncle kept as close to me as he could; he never
lost sight of me, and in many straits his arm furnished me with a
powerful support. He himself seemed to possess an instinct for
equilibrium, for he never stumbled. The Icelanders, though burdened
with our loads, climbed with the agility of mountaineers.

To judge by the distant appearance of the summit of Snfell, it would
have seemed too steep to ascend on our side. Fortunately, after an
hour of fatigue and athletic exercises, in the midst of the vast
surface of snow presented by the hollow between the two peaks, a kind
of staircase appeared unexpectedly which greatly facilitated our
ascent. It was formed by one of those torrents of stones flung up by
the eruptions, called 'sting' by the Icelanders. If this torrent had
not been arrested in its fall by the formation of the sides of the
mountain, it would have gone on to the sea and formed more islands.

Such as it was, it did us good service. The steepness increased, but
these stone steps allowed us to rise with facility, and even with
such rapidity that, having rested for a moment while my companions
continued their ascent, I perceived them already reduced by distance
to microscopic dimensions.

At seven we had ascended the two thousand steps of this grand
staircase, and we had attained a bulge in the mountain, a kind of bed
on which rested the cone proper of the crater.

Three thousand two hundred feet below us stretched the sea. We had
passed the limit of perpetual snow, which, on account of the moisture
of the climate, is at a greater elevation in Iceland than the high
latitude would give reason to suppose. The cold was excessively keen.
The wind was blowing violently. I was exhausted. The Professor saw
that my limbs were refusing to perform their office, and in spite of
his impatience he decided on stopping. He therefore spoke to the
hunter, who shook his head, saying:

"_Ofvanfr._"

"It seems we must go higher," said my uncle.

Then he asked Hans for his reason.

"_Mistour,_" replied the guide.

"_Ja Mistour,_" said one of the Icelanders in a tone of alarm.

"What does that word mean?" I asked uneasily.

"Look!" said my uncle.

I looked down upon the plain. An immense column of pulverized pumice,
sand and dust was rising with a whirling circular motion like a
waterspout; the wind was lashing it on to that side of Snfell where
we were holding on; this dense veil, hung across the sun, threw a
deep shadow over the mountain. If that huge revolving pillar sloped
down, it would involve us in its whirling eddies. This phenomenon,
which is not unfrequent when the wind blows from the glaciers, is
called in Icelandic 'mistour.'

"_Hastigt! hastigt!_" cried our guide.

Without knowing Danish I understood at once that we must follow Hans
at the top of our speed. He began to circle round the cone of the
crater, but in a diagonal direction so as to facilitate our progress.
Presently the dust storm fell upon the mountain, which quivered under
the shock; the loose stones, caught with the irresistible blasts of
wind, flew about in a perfect hail as in an eruption. Happily we were
on the opposite side, and sheltered from all harm. But for the
precaution of our guide, our mangled bodies, torn and pounded into
fragments, would have been carried afar like the ruins hurled along
by some unknown meteor.

Yet Hans did not think it prudent to spend the night upon the sides
of the cone. We continued our zigzag climb. The fifteen hundred
remaining feet took us five hours to clear; the circuitous route, the
diagonal and the counter marches, must have measured at least three
leagues. I could stand it no longer. I was yielding to the effects of
hunger and cold. The rarefied air scarcely gave play to the action of
my lungs.

At last, at eleven in the sunlight night, the summit of Snfell was
reached, and before going in for shelter into the crater I had time
to observe the midnight sun, at his lowest point, gilding with his
pale rays the island that slept at my feet.




CHAPTER XVI.

BOLDLY DOWN THE CRATER


Supper was rapidly devoured, and the little company housed themselves
as best they could. The bed was hard, the shelter not very
substantial, and our position an anxious one, at five thousand feet
above the sea level. Yet I slept particularly well; it was one of the
best nights I had ever had, and I did not even dream.

Next morning we awoke half frozen by the sharp keen air, but with the
light of a splendid sun. I rose from my granite bed and went out to
enjoy the magnificent spectacle that lay unrolled before me.

I stood on the very summit of the southernmost of Snfell's peaks.
The range of the eye extended over the whole island. By an optical
law which obtains at all great heights, the shores seemed raised and
the centre depressed. It seemed as if one of Helbesmer's raised maps
lay at my feet. I could see deep valleys intersecting each other in
every direction, precipices like low walls, lakes reduced to ponds,
rivers abbreviated into streams. On my right were numberless glaciers
and innumerable peaks, some plumed with feathery clouds of smoke. The
undulating surface of these endless mountains, crested with sheets of
snow, reminded one of a stormy sea. If I looked westward, there the
ocean lay spread out in all its magnificence, like a mere
continuation of those flock-like summits. The eye could hardly tell
where the snowy ridges ended and the foaming waves began.

I was thus steeped in the marvellous ecstasy which all high summits
develop in the mind; and now without giddiness, for I was beginning
to be accustomed to these sublime aspects of nature. My dazzled eyes
were bathed in the bright flood of the solar rays. I was forgetting
where and who I was, to live the life of elves and sylphs, the
fanciful creation of Scandinavian superstitions. I felt intoxicated
with the sublime pleasure of lofty elevations without thinking of the
profound abysses into which I was shortly to be plunged. But I was
brought back to the realities of things by the arrival of Hans and
the Professor, who joined me on the summit.

My uncle pointed out to me in the far west a light steam or mist, a
semblance of land, which bounded the distant horizon of waters.

"Greenland!" said he.

"Greenland?" I cried.

"Yes; we are only thirty-five leagues from it; and during thaws the
white bears, borne by the ice fields from the north, are carried even
into Iceland. But never mind that. Here we are at the top of Snfell
and here are two peaks, one north and one south. Hans will tell us
the name of that on which we are now standing."

The question being put, Hans replied:

"Scartaris."

My uncle shot a triumphant glance at me.

"Now for the crater!" he cried.

The crater of Snfell resembled an inverted cone, the opening of which
might be half a league in diameter. Its depth appeared to be about
two thousand feet. Imagine the aspect of such a reservoir, brim full
and running over with liquid fire amid the rolling thunder. The
bottom of the funnel was about 250 feet in circuit, so that the
gentle slope allowed its lower brim to be reached without much
difficulty. Involuntarily I compared the whole crater to an enormous
erected mortar, and the comparison put me in a terrible fright.

"What madness," I thought, "to go down into a mortar, perhaps a
loaded mortar, to be shot up into the air at a moment's notice!"

But I did not try to back out of it. Hans with perfect coolness
resumed the lead, and I followed him without a word.

In order to facilitate the descent, Hans wound his way down the cone
by a spiral path. Our route lay amidst eruptive rocks, some of which,
shaken out of their loosened beds, rushed bounding down the abyss,
and in their fall awoke echoes remarkable for their loud and
well-defined sharpness.

In certain parts of the cone there were glaciers. Here Hans advanced
only with extreme precaution, sounding his way with his iron-pointed
pole, to discover any crevasses in it. At particularly dubious
passages we were obliged to connect ourselves with each other by a
long cord, in order that any man who missed his footing might be held
up by his companions. This solid formation was prudent, but did not
remove all danger.

Yet, notwithstanding the difficulties of the descent, down steeps
unknown to the guide, the journey was accomplished without accidents,
except the loss of a coil of rope, which escaped from the hands of an
Icelander, and took the shortest way to the bottom of the abyss.

At mid-day we arrived. I raised my head and saw straight above me the
upper aperture of the cone, framing a bit of sky of very small
circumference, but almost perfectly round. Just upon the edge
appeared the snowy peak of Saris, standing out sharp and clear
against endless space.

At the bottom of the crater were three chimneys, through which, in
its eruptions, Snfell had driven forth fire and lava from its
central furnace. Each of these chimneys was a hundred feet in
diameter. They gaped before us right in our path. I had not the
courage to look down either of them. But Professor Liedenbrock had
hastily surveyed all three; he was panting, running from one to the
other, gesticulating, and uttering incoherent expressions. Hans and
his comrades, seated upon loose lava rocks, looked at him with as much
wonder as they knew how to express, and perhaps taking him for an
escaped lunatic.

Suddenly my uncle uttered a cry. I thought his foot must have slipped
and that he had fallen down one of the holes. But, no; I saw him,
with arms outstretched and legs straddling wide apart, erect before a
granite rock that stood in the centre of the crater, just like a
pedestal made ready to receive a statue of Pluto. He stood like a man
stupefied, but the stupefaction soon gave way to delirious rapture.

"Axel, Axel," he cried. "Come, come!"

I ran. Hans and the Icelanders never stirred.

"Look!" cried the Professor.

And, sharing his astonishment, but I think not his joy, I read on the
western face of the block, in Runic characters, half mouldered away
with lapse of ages, this thrice-accursed name:

[At this point a Runic text appears]

"Arne Saknussemm!" replied my uncle. "Do you yet doubt?"

I made no answer; and I returned in silence to my lava seat in a
state of utter speechless consternation. Here was crushing evidence.

How long I remained plunged in agonizing reflections I cannot tell;
all that I know is, that on raising my head again, I saw only my
uncle and Hans at the bottom of the crater. The Icelanders had been
dismissed, and they were now descending the outer slopes of Snfell
to return to Stapi.

Hans slept peaceably at the foot of a rock, in a lava bed, where he
had found a suitable couch for himself; but my uncle was pacing
around the bottom of the crater like a wild beast in a cage. I had
neither the wish nor the strength to rise, and following the guide's
example I went off into an unhappy slumber, fancying I could hear
ominous noises or feel tremblings within the recesses of the mountain.

Thus the first night in the crater passed away.

The next morning, a grey, heavy, cloudy sky seemed to droop over the
summit of the cone. I did not know this first from the appearances of
nature, but I found it out by my uncle's impetuous wrath.

I soon found out the cause, and hope dawned again in my heart. For
this reason.

Of the three ways open before us, one had been taken by Saknussemm.
The indications of the learned Icelander hinted at in the cryptogram,
pointed to this fact that the shadow of Scartaris came to touch that
particular way during the latter days of the month of June.

That sharp peak might hence be considered as the gnomon of a vast sun
dial, the shadow projected from which on a certain day would point
out the road to the centre of the earth.

Now, no sun no shadow, and therefore no guide. Here was June 25. If
the sun was clouded for six days we must postpone our visit till next
year.

My limited powers of description would fail, were I to attempt a
picture of the Professor's angry impatience. The day wore on, and no
shadow came to lay itself along the bottom of the crater. Hans did
not move from the spot he had selected; yet he must be asking himself
what were we waiting for, if he asked himself anything at all. My
uncle spoke not a word to me. His gaze, ever directed upwards, was
lost in the grey and misty space beyond.

On the 26th nothing yet. Rain mingled with snow was falling all day
long. Hans built a hut of pieces of lava. I felt a malicious pleasure
in watching the thousand rills and cascades that came tumbling down
the sides of the cone, and the deafening continuous din awaked by
every stone against which they bounded.

My uncle's rage knew no bounds. It was enough to irritate a meeker
man than he; for it was foundering almost within the port.

But Heaven never sends unmixed grief, and for Professor Liedenbrock
there was a satisfaction in store proportioned to his desperate
anxieties.

The next day the sky was again overcast; but on the 29th of June, the
last day but one of the month, with the change of the moon came a
change of weather. The sun poured a flood of light down the crater.
Every hillock, every rock and stone, every projecting surface, had
its share of the beaming torrent, and threw its shadow on the ground.
Amongst them all, Scartaris laid down his sharp-pointed angular
shadow which began to move slowly in the opposite direction to that
of the radiant orb.

My uncle turned too, and followed it.

At noon, being at its least extent, it came and softly fell upon the
edge of the middle chimney.

"There it is! there it is!" shouted the Professor.

"Now for the centre of the globe!" he added in Danish.

I looked at Hans, to hear what he would say.

"_Fort!_" was his tranquil answer.

"Forward!" replied my uncle.

It was thirteen minutes past one.




CHAPTER XVII.

VERTICAL DESCENT


Now began our real journey. Hitherto our toil had overcome all
difficulties, now difficulties would spring up at every step.

I had not yet ventured to look down the bottomless pit into which I
was about to take a plunge. The supreme hour had come. I might now
either share in the enterprise or refuse to move forward. But I was
ashamed to recoil in the presence of the hunter. Hans accepted the
enterprise with such calmness, such indifference, such perfect
disregard of any possible danger that I blushed at the idea of being
less brave than he. If I had been alone I might have once more tried
the effect of argument; but in the presence of the guide I held my
peace; my heart flew back to my sweet Virlandaise, and I approached
the central chimney.

I have already mentioned that it was a hundred feet in diameter, and
three hundred feet round. I bent over a projecting rock and gazed
down. My hair stood on end with terror. The bewildering feeling of
vacuity laid hold upon me. I felt my centre of gravity shifting its
place, and giddiness mounting into my brain like drunkenness. There
is nothing more treacherous than this attraction down deep abysses. I
was just about to drop down, when a hand laid hold of me. It was that
of Hans. I suppose I had not taken as many lessons on gulf
exploration as I ought to have done in the Frelsers Kirk at
Copenhagen.

But, however short was my examination of this well, I had taken some
account of its conformation. Its almost perpendicular walls were
bristling with innumerable projections which would facilitate the
descent. But if there was no want of steps, still there was no rail.
A rope fastened to the edge of the aperture might have helped us
down. But how were we to unfasten it, when arrived at the other end?

My uncle employed a very simple expedient to obviate this difficulty.
He uncoiled a cord of the thickness of a finger, and four hundred
feet long; first he dropped half of it down, then he passed it round
a lava block that projected conveniently, and threw the other half
down the chimney. Each of us could then descend by holding with the
hand both halves of the rope, which would not be able to unroll
itself from its hold; when two hundred feet down, it would be easy to
get possession of the whole of the rope by letting one end go and
pulling down by the other. Then the exercise would go on again _ad
infinitum_.

"Now," said my uncle, after having completed these preparations, "now
let us look to our loads. I will divide them into three lots; each of
us will strap one upon his back. I mean only fragile articles."

Of course, we were not included under that head.

"Hans," said he, "will take charge of the tools and a portion of the
provisions; you, Axel, will take another third of the provisions, and
the arms; and I will take the rest of the provisions and the delicate
instruments."

"But," said I, "the clothes, and that mass of ladders and ropes, what
is to become of them?"

"They will go down by themselves."

"How so?" I asked.

"You will see presently."

My uncle was always willing to employ magnificent resources. Obeying
orders, Hans tied all the non-fragile articles in one bundle, corded
them firmly, and sent them bodily down the gulf before us.

I listened to the dull thuds of the descending bale. My uncle,
leaning over the abyss, followed the descent of the luggage with a
satisfied nod, and only rose erect when he had quite lost sight of it.

"Very well, now it is our turn."

Now I ask any sensible man if it was possible to hear those words
without a shudder.

The Professor fastened his package of instruments upon his shoulders;
Hans took the tools; I took the arms: and the descent commenced in
the following order; Hans, my uncle, and myself. It was effected in
profound silence, broken only by the descent of loosened stones down
the dark gulf.

I dropped as it were, frantically clutching the double cord with one
hand and buttressing myself from the wall with the other by means of
my stick. One idea overpowered me almost, fear lest the rock should
give way from which I was hanging. This cord seemed a fragile thing
for three persons to be suspended from. I made as little use of it as
possible, performing wonderful feats of equilibrium upon the lava
projections which my foot seemed to catch hold of like a hand.

When one of these slippery steps shook under the heavier form of
Hans, he said in his tranquil voice:

"_Gif akt!_"

"Attention!" repeated my uncle.

In half an hour we were standing upon the surface of a rock jammed in
across the chimney from one side to the other.

Hans pulled the rope by one of its ends, the other rose in the air;
after passing the higher rock it came down again, bringing with it a
rather dangerous shower of bits of stone and lava.

Leaning over the edge of our narrow standing ground, I observed that
the bottom of the hole was still invisible.

The same manoeuvre was repeated with the cord, and half an hour after
we had descended another two hundred feet.

I don't suppose the maddest geologist under such circumstances would
have studied the nature of the rocks that we were passing. I am sure
I did trouble my head about them. Pliocene, miocene, eocene,
cretaceous, jurassic, triassic, permian, carboniferous, devonian,
silurian, or primitive was all one to me. But the Professor, no
doubt, was pursuing his observations or taking notes, for in one of
our halts he said to me:

"The farther I go the more confidence I feel. The order of these
volcanic formations affords the strongest confirmation to the
theories of Davy. We are now among the primitive rocks, upon which
the chemical operations took place which are produced by the contact
of elementary bases of metals with water. I repudiate the notion of
central heat altogether. We shall see further proof of that very
soon."

No variation, always the same conclusion. Of course, I was not
inclined to argue. My silence was taken for consent and the descent
went on.

Another three hours, and I saw no bottom to the chimney yet. When I
lifted my head I perceived the gradual contraction of its aperture.
Its walls, by a gentle incline, were drawing closer to each other,
and it was beginning to grow darker.

Still we kept descending. It seemed to me that the falling stones
were meeting with an earlier resistance, and that the concussion gave
a more abrupt and deadened sound.

As I had taken care to keep an exact account of our manoeuvres with
the rope, which I knew that we had repeated fourteen times, each
descent occupying half an hour, the conclusion was easy that we had
been seven hours, plus fourteen quarters of rest, making ten hours
and a half. We had started at one, it must therefore now be eleven
o'clock; and the depth to which we had descended was fourteen times
200 feet, or 2,800 feet.

At this moment I heard the voice of Hans.

"Halt!" he cried.

I stopped short just as I was going to place my feet upon my uncle's
head.

"We are there," he cried.

"Where?" said I, stepping near to him.

"At the bottom of the perpendicular chimney," he answered.

"Is there no way farther?"

"Yes; there is a sort of passage which inclines to the right. We will
see about that to-morrow. Let us have our supper, and go to sleep."

The darkness was not yet complete. The provision case was opened; we
refreshed ourselves, and went to sleep as well as we could upon a bed
of stones and lava fragments.

When lying on my back, I opened my eyes and saw a bright sparkling
point of light at the extremity of the gigantic tube 3,000 feet long,
now a vast telescope.

It was a star which, seen from this depth, had lost all
scintillation, and which by my computation should be  46; _Ursa
minor._ Then I fell fast asleep.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE WONDERS OF TERRESTRIAL DEPTHS


At eight in the morning a ray of daylight came to wake us up. The
thousand shining surfaces of lava on the walls received it on its
passage, and scattered it like a shower of sparks.

There was light enough to distinguish surrounding objects.

"Well, Axel, what do you say to it?" cried my uncle, rubbing his
hands. "Did you ever spend a quieter night in our little house at
Knigsberg? No noise of cart wheels, no cries of basket women, no
boatmen shouting!"

"No doubt it is very quiet at the bottom of this well, but there is
something alarming in the quietness itself."

"Now come!" my uncle cried; "if you are frightened already, what will
you be by and by? We have not gone a single inch yet into the bowels
of the earth."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that we have only reached the level of the island, long
vertical tube, which terminates at the mouth of the crater, has its
lower end only at the level of the sea."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Quite sure. Consult the barometer."

In fact, the mercury, which had risen in the instrument as fast as we
descended, had stopped at twenty-nine inches.

"You see," said the Professor, "we have now only the pressure of our
atmosphere, and I shall be glad when the aneroid takes the place of
the barometer."

And in truth this instrument would become useless as soon as the
weight of the atmosphere should exceed the pressure ascertained at
the level of the sea.

"But," I said, "is there not reason to fear that this ever-increasing
pressure will become at last very painful to bear?"

"No; we shall descend at a slow rate, and our lungs will become
inured to a denser atmosphere. Aeronauts find the want of air as they
rise to high elevations, but we shall perhaps have too much: of the
two, this is what I should prefer. Don't let us lose a moment. Where
is the bundle we sent down before us?"

I then remembered that we had searched for it in vain the evening
before. My uncle questioned Hans, who, after having examined
attentively with the eye of a huntsman, replied:

"_Der huppe!_"

"Up there."

And so it was. The bundle had been caught by a projection a hundred
feet above us. Immediately the Icelander climbed up like a cat, and
in a few minutes the package was in our possession.

"Now," said my uncle, "let us breakfast; but we must lay in a good
stock, for we don't know how long we may have to go on."

The biscuit and extract of meat were washed down with a draught of
water mingled with a little gin.

Breakfast over, my uncle drew from his pocket a small notebook,
intended for scientific observations. He consulted his instruments,
and recorded:

"Monday, July 1.

"Chronometer, 8.17 a.m.; barometer, 297 in.; thermometer, 6 (43
F.). Direction, E.S.E."

This last observation applied to the dark gallery, and was indicated
by the compass.

"Now, Axel," cried the Professor with enthusiasm, "now we are really
going into the interior of the earth. At this precise moment the
journey commences."

So saying, my uncle took in one hand Ruhmkorff's apparatus, which was
hanging from his neck; and with the other he formed an electric
communication with the coil in the lantern, and a sufficiently bright
light dispersed the darkness of the passage.

Hans carried the other apparatus, which was also put into action.
This ingenious application of electricity would enable us to go on
for a long time by creating an artificial light even in the midst of
the most inflammable gases.

"Now, march!" cried my uncle.

Each shouldered his package. Hans drove before him the load of cords
and clothes; and, myself walking last, we entered the gallery.

At the moment of becoming engulfed in this dark gallery, I raised my
head, and saw for the last time through the length of that vast tube
the sky of Iceland, which I was never to behold again.

The lava, in the last eruption of 1229, had forced a passage through
this tunnel. It still lined the walls with a thick and glistening
coat. The electric light was here intensified a hundredfold by
reflection.

The only difficulty in proceeding lay in not sliding too fast down an
incline of about forty-five degrees; happily certain asperities and a
few blisterings here and there formed steps, and we descended,
letting our baggage slip before us from the end of a long rope.

But that which formed steps under our feet became stalactites
overhead. The lava, which was porous in many places, had formed a
surface covered with small rounded blisters; crystals of opaque
quartz, set with limpid tears of glass, and hanging like clustered
chandeliers from the vaulted roof, seemed as it were to kindle and
form a sudden illumination as we passed on our way. It seemed as if
the genii of the depths were lighting up their palace to receive
their terrestrial guests.

"It is magnificent!" I cried spontaneously. "My uncle, what a sight!
Don't you admire those blending hues of lava, passing from reddish
brown to bright yellow by imperceptible shades? And these crystals
are just like globes of light."

"Ali, you think so, do you, Axel, my boy? Well, you will see greater
splendours than these, I hope. Now let us march: march!"

He had better have said slide, for we did nothing but drop down the
steep inclines. It was the facifs _descensus Averni_ of Virgil. The
compass, which I consulted frequently, gave our direction as
south-east with inflexible steadiness. This lava stream deviated
neither to the right nor to the left.

Yet there was no sensible increase of temperature. This justified
Davy's theory, and more than once I consulted the thermometer with
surprise. Two hours after our departure it only marked 10 (50
Fahr.), an increase of only 4. This gave reason for believing that
our descent was more horizontal than vertical. As for the exact depth
reached, it was very easy to ascertain that; the Professor measured
accurately the angles of deviation and inclination on the road, but
he kept the results to himself.

About eight in the evening he signalled to stop. Hans sat down at
once. The lamps were hung upon a projection in the lava; we were in a
sort of cavern where there was plenty of air. Certain puffs of air
reached us. What atmospheric disturbance was the cause of them? I
could not answer that question at the moment. Hunger and fatigue made
me incapable of reasoning. A descent of seven hours consecutively is
not made without considerable expenditure of strength. I was
exhausted. The order to 'halt' therefore gave me pleasure. Hans laid
our provisions upon a block of lava, and we ate with a good appetite.
But one thing troubled me, our supply of water was half consumed. My
uncle reckoned upon a fresh supply from subterranean sources, but
hitherto we had met with none. I could not help drawing his attention
to this circumstance.

"Are you surprised at this want of springs?" he said.

"More than that, I am anxious about it; we have only water enough for
five days."

"Don't be uneasy, Axel, we shall find more than we want."

"When?"

"When we have left this bed of lava behind us. How could springs
break through such walls as these?"

"But perhaps this passage runs to a very great depth. It seems to me
that we have made no great progress vertically."

"Why do you suppose that?"

"Because if we had gone deep into the crust of earth, we should have
encountered greater heat."

"According to your system," said my uncle. "But what does the
thermometer say?"

"Hardly fifteen degrees (59 Fahr), nine degrees only since our
departure."

"Well, what is your conclusion?"

"This is my conclusion. According to exact observations, the increase
of temperature in the interior of the globe advances at the rate of
one degree (1 4/5 Fahr.) for every hundred feet. But certain local
conditions may modify this rate. Thus at Yakoutsk in Siberia the
increase of a degree is ascertained to be reached every 36 feet. This
difference depends upon the heat-conducting power of the rocks.
Moreover, in the neighbourhood of an extinct volcano, through gneiss,
it has been observed that the increase of a degree is only attained
at every 125 feet. Let us therefore assume this last hypothesis as
the most suitable to our situation, and calculate."

"Well, do calculate, my boy."

"Nothing is easier," said I, putting down figures in my note book.
"Nine times a hundred and twenty-five feet gives a depth of eleven
hundred and twenty-five feet."

"Very accurate indeed."

"Well?"

"By my observation we are at 10,000 feet below the level of the sea."

"Is that possible?"

"Yes, or figures are of no use."

The Professor's calculations were quite correct. We had already
attained a depth of six thousand feet beyond that hitherto reached by
the foot of man, such as the mines of Kitz Bahl in Tyrol, and those
of Wuttembourg in Bohemia.

The temperature, which ought to have been 81 (178 Fahr.) was
scarcely 15 (59 Fahr.). Here was cause for reflection.




CHAPTER XIX.

GEOLOGICAL STUDIES IN SITU


Next day, Tuesday, June 30, at 6 a.m., the descent began again.

We were still following the gallery of lava, a real natural
staircase, and as gently sloping as those inclined planes which in
some old houses are still found instead of flights of steps. And so
we went on until 12.17, the, precise moment when we overtook Hans,
who had stopped.

"Ah! here we are," exclaimed my uncle, "at the very end of the
chimney."

I looked around me. We were standing at the intersection of two
roads, both dark and narrow. Which were we to take? This was a
difficulty.

Still my uncle refused to admit an appearance of hesitation, either
before me or the guide; he pointed out the Eastern tunnel, and we
were soon all three in it.

Besides there would have been interminable hesitation before this
choice of roads; for since there was no indication whatever to guide
our choice, we were obliged to trust to chance.

The slope of this gallery was scarcely perceptible, and its sections
very unequal. Sometimes we passed a series of arches succeeding each
other like the majestic arcades of a gothic cathedral. Here the
architects of the middle ages might have found studies for every form
of the sacred art which sprang from the development of the pointed
arch. A mile farther we had to bow our heads under corniced elliptic
arches in the romanesque style; and massive pillars standing out from
the wall bent under the spring of the vault that rested heavily upon
them. In other places this magnificence gave way to narrow channels
between low structures which looked like beaver's huts, and we had to
creep along through extremely narrow passages.

The heat was perfectly bearable. Involuntarily I began to think of
its heat when the lava thrown out by Snfell was boiling and working
through this now silent road. I imagined the torrents of fire hurled
back at every angle in the gallery, and the accumulation of intensely
heated vapours in the midst of this confined channel.

I only hope, thought I, that this so-called extinct volcano won't
take a fancy in his old age to begin his sports again!

I abstained from communicating these fears to Professor Liedenbrock. He
would never have understood them at all. He had but one idea--forward!
He walked, he slid, he scrambled, he tumbled, with a persistency which
one could not but admire.

By six in the evening, after a not very fatiguing walk, we had gone
two leagues south, but scarcely a quarter of a mile down.

My uncle said it was time to go to sleep. We ate without talking, and
went to sleep without reflection.

Our arrangements for the night were very simple; a railway rug each,
into which we rolled ourselves, was our sole covering. We had neither
cold nor intrusive visits to fear. Travellers who penetrate into the
wilds of central Africa, and into the pathless forests of the New
World, are obliged to watch over each other by night. But we enjoyed
absolute safety and utter seclusion; no savages or wild beasts
infested these silent depths.

Next morning, we awoke fresh and in good spirits. The road was
resumed. As the day before, we followed the path of the lava. It was
impossible to tell what rocks we were passing: the tunnel, instead of
tending lower, approached more and more nearly to a horizontal
direction, I even fancied a slight rise. But about ten this upward
tendency became so evident, and therefore so fatiguing, that I was
obliged to slacken my pace.

"Well, Axel?" demanded the Professor impatiently.

"Well, I cannot stand it any longer," I replied.

"What! after three hours' walk over such easy ground."

"It may be easy, but it is tiring all the same."

"What, when we have nothing to do but keep going down!"

"Going up, if you please."

"Going up!" said my uncle, with a shrug.

"No doubt, for the last half-hour the inclines have gone the other
way, and at this rate we shall soon arrive upon the level soil of
Iceland."

The Professor nodded slowly and uneasily like a man that declines to
be convinced. I tried to resume the conversation. He answered not a
word, and gave the signal for a start. I saw that his silence was
nothing but ill-humour.

Still I had courageously shouldered my burden again, and was rapidly
following Hans, whom my uncle preceded. I was anxious not to be left
behind. My greatest care was not to lose sight of my companions. I
shuddered at the thought of being lost in the mazes of this vast
subterranean labyrinth.

Besides, if the ascending road did become steeper, I was comforted
with the thought that it was bringing us nearer to the surface. There
was hope in this. Every step confirmed me in it, and I was rejoicing
at the thought of meeting my little Gruben again.

By mid-day there was a change in the appearance of this wall of the
gallery. I noticed it by a diminution of the amount of light
reflected from the sides; solid rock was appearing in the place of
the lava coating. The mass was composed of inclined and sometimes
vertical strata. We were passing through rocks of the transition or
silurian [1] system.

"It is evident," I cried, "the marine deposits formed in the second
period, these shales, limestones, and sandstones. We are turning away
from the primary granite. We are just as if we were people of Hamburg
going to Lbeck by way of Hanover!"

I had better have kept my observations to myself. But my geological
instinct was stronger than my prudence, and uncle Liedenbrock heard
my exclamation.

"What's that you are saying?" he asked.

"See," I said, pointing to the varied series of sandstones and
limestones, and the first indication of slate.

"Well?"

"We are at the period when the first plants and animals appeared."

"Do you think so?"

"Look close, and examine."

I obliged the Professor to move his lamp over the walls of the
gallery. I expected some signs of astonishment; but he spoke not a
word, and went on.

Had he understood me or not? Did he refuse to admit, out of self-love
as an uncle and a philosopher, that he had mistaken his way when he
chose the eastern tunnel? or was he determined to examine this
passage to its farthest extremity? It was evident that we had left
the lava path, and that this road could not possibly lead to the
extinct furnace of Snfell.

Yet I asked myself if I was not depending too much on this change in
the rock. Might I not myself be mistaken? Were we really crossing the
layers of rock which overlie the granite foundation?

[1]The name given by Sir Roderick Murchison to a vast series of
fossiliferous strata, which lies between the non-fossiliferous slaty
schists below and the old red sandstone above. The system is well
developed in the region of Shropshire, etc., once inhabited by the
Silures under Caractacus, or Caradoc. (Tr.)

If I am right, I thought, I must soon find some fossil remains of
primitive life; and then we must yield to evidence. I will look.

I had not gone a hundred paces before incontestable proofs presented
themselves. It could not be otherwise, for in the Silurian age the
seas contained at least fifteen hundred vegetable and animal species.
My feet, which had become accustomed to the indurated lava floor,
suddenly rested upon a dust composed of the _debris_ of plants and
shells. In the walls were distinct impressions of fucoids and
lycopodites.

Professor Liedenbrock could not be mistaken, I thought, and yet he
pushed on, with, I suppose, his eyes resolutely shut.

This was only invincible obstinacy. I could hold out no longer. I
picked up a perfectly formed shell, which had belonged to an animal
not unlike the woodlouse: then, joining my uncle, I said:

"Look at this!"

"Very well," said he quietly, "it is the shell of a crustacean, of an
extinct species called a trilobite. Nothing more."

"But don't you conclude--?"

"Just what you conclude yourself. Yes; I do, perfectly. We have left
the granite and the lava. It is possible that I may be mistaken. But
I cannot be sure of that until I have reached the very end of this
gallery."

"You are right in doing this, my uncle, and I should quite approve of
your determination, if there were not a danger threatening us nearer
and nearer."

"What danger?"

"The want of water."

"Well, Axel, we will put ourselves upon rations."




CHAPTER XX.

THE FIRST SIGNS OF DISTRESS


In fact, we had to ration ourselves. Our provision of water could not
last more than three days. I found that out for certain when
supper-time came. And, to our sorrow, we had little reason to expect
to find a spring in these transition beds.

The whole of the next day the gallery opened before us its endless
arcades. We moved on almost without a word. Hans' silence seemed to
be infecting us.

The road was now not ascending, at least not perceptibly. Sometimes,
even, it seemed to have a slight fall. But this tendency, which was
very trifling, could not do anything to reassure the Professor; for
there was no change in the beds, and the transitional characteristics
became more and more decided.

The electric light was reflected in sparkling splendour from the
schist, limestone, and old red sandstone of the walls. It might have
been thought that we were passing through a section of Wales, of
which an ancient people gave its name to this system. Specimens of
magnificent marbles clothed the walls, some of a greyish agate
fantastically veined with white, others of rich crimson or yellow
dashed with splotches of red; then came dark cherry-coloured marbles
relieved by the lighter tints of limestone.

The greater part of these bore impressions of primitive organisms.
Creation had evidently advanced since the day before. Instead of
rudimentary trilobites, I noticed remains of a more perfect order of
beings, amongst others ganoid fishes and some of those sauroids in
which palaeontologists have discovered the earliest reptile forms.
The Devonian seas were peopled by animals of these species, and
deposited them by thousands in the rocks of the newer formation.

It was evident that we were ascending that scale of animal life in
which man fills the highest place. But Professor Liedenbrock seemed
not to notice it.

He was awaiting one of two events, either the appearance of a
vertical well opening before his feet, down which our descent might
be resumed, or that of some obstacle which should effectually turn us
back on our own footsteps. But evening came and neither wish was
gratified.

On Friday, after a night during which I felt pangs of thirst, our
little troop again plunged into the winding passages of the gallery.

After ten hours' walking I observed a singular deadening of the
reflection of our lamps from the side walls. The marble, the schist,
the limestone, and the sandstone were giving way to a dark and
lustreless lining. At one moment, the tunnel becoming very narrow, I
leaned against the wall.

When I removed my hand it was black. I looked nearer, and found we
were in a coal formation.

"A coal mine!" I cried.

"A mine without miners," my uncle replied.

"Who knows?" I asked.

"I know," the Professor pronounced decidedly, "I am certain that this
gallery driven through beds of coal was never pierced by the hand of
man. But whether it be the hand of nature or not does not matter.
Supper time is come; let us sup."

Hans prepared some food. I scarcely ate, and I swallowed down the few
drops of water rationed out to me. One flask half full was all we had
left to slake the thirst of three men.

After their meal my two companions laid themselves down upon their
rugs, and found in sleep a solace for their fatigue. But I could not
sleep, and I counted every hour until morning.

On Saturday, at six, we started afresh. In twenty minutes we reached
a vast open space; I then knew that the hand of man had not hollowed
out this mine; the vaults would have been shored up, and, as it was,
they seemed to be held up by a miracle of equilibrium.

This cavern was about a hundred feet wide and a hundred and fifty in
height. A large mass had been rent asunder by a subterranean
disturbance. Yielding to some vast power from below it had broken
asunder, leaving this great hollow into which human beings were now
penetrating for the first time.

The whole history of the carboniferous period was written upon these
gloomy walls, and a geologist might with ease trace all its diverse
phases. The beds of coal were separated by strata of sandstone or
compact clays, and appeared crushed under the weight of overlying
strata.

At the age of the world which preceded the secondary period, the
earth was clothed with immense vegetable forms, the product of the
double influence of tropical heat and constant moisture; a vapoury
atmosphere surrounded the earth, still veiling the direct rays of the
sun.

Thence arises the conclusion that the high temperature then existing
was due to some other source than the heat of the sun. Perhaps even
the orb of day may not have been ready yet to play the splendid part
he now acts. There were no 'climates' as yet, and a torrid heat,
equal from pole to equator, was spread over the whole surface of the
globe. Whence this heat? Was it from the interior of the earth?

Notwithstanding the theories of Professor Liedenbrock, a violent heat
did at that time brood within the body of the spheroid. Its action
was felt to the very last coats of the terrestrial crust; the plants,
unacquainted with the beneficent influences of the sun, yielded
neither flowers nor scent. But their roots drew vigorous life from
the burning soil of the early days of this planet.

There were but few trees. Herbaceous plants alone existed. There were
tall grasses, ferns, lycopods, besides sigillaria, asterophyllites,
now scarce plants, but then the species might be counted by thousands.

The coal measures owe their origin to this period of profuse
vegetation. The yet elastic and yielding crust of the earth obeyed
the fluid forces beneath. Thence innumerable fissures and
depressions. The plants, sunk underneath the waters, formed by
degrees into vast accumulated masses.

Then came the chemical action of nature; in the depths of the seas
the vegetable accumulations first became peat; then, acted upon by
generated gases and the heat of fermentation, they underwent a
process of complete mineralization.

Thus were formed those immense coalfields, which nevertheless, are
not inexhaustible, and which three centuries at the present
accelerated rate of consumption will exhaust unless the industrial
world will devise a remedy.

These reflections came into my mind whilst I was contemplating the
mineral wealth stored up in this portion of the globe. These no
doubt, I thought, will never be discovered; the working of such deep
mines would involve too large an outlay, and where would be the use
as long as coal is yet spread far and wide near the surface? Such as
my eyes behold these virgin stores, such they will be when this world
comes to an end.

But still we marched on, and I alone was forgetting the length of the
way by losing myself in the midst of geological contemplations. The
temperature remained what it had been during our passage through the
lava and schists. Only my sense of smell was forcibly affected by an
odour of protocarburet of hydrogen. I immediately recognised in this
gallery the presence of a considerable quantity of the dangerous gas
called by miners firedamp, the explosion of which has often
occasioned such dreadful catastrophes.

Happily, our light was from Ruhmkorff's ingenious apparatus. If
unfortunately we had explored this gallery with torches, a terrible
explosion would have put an end to travelling and travellers at one
stroke.

This excursion through the coal mine lasted till night. My uncle
scarcely could restrain his impatience at the horizontal road. The
darkness, always deep twenty yards before us, prevented us from
estimating the length of the gallery; and I was beginning to think it
must be endless, when suddenly at six o'clock a wall very
unexpectedly stood before us. Right or left, top or bottom, there was
no road farther; we were at the end of a blind alley. "Very well,
it's all right!" cried my uncle, "now, at any rate, we shall know
what we are about. We are not in Saknussemm's road, and all we have
to do is to go back. Let us take a night's rest, and in three days we
shall get to the fork in the road." "Yes," said I, "if we have any
strength left." "Why not?" "Because to-morrow we shall have no
water." "Nor courage either?" asked my uncle severely. I dared make
no answer.




CHAPTER XXI.

COMPASSION FUSES THE PROFESSOR'S HEART


Next day we started early. We had to hasten forward. It was a three
days' march to the cross roads.

I will not speak of the sufferings we endured in our return. My uncle
bore them with the angry impatience of a man obliged to own his
weakness; Hans with the resignation of his passive nature; I, I
confess, with complaints and expressions of despair. I had no spirit
to oppose this ill fortune.

As I had foretold, the water failed entirely by the end of the first
day's retrograde march. Our fluid aliment was now nothing but gin;
but this infernal fluid burned my throat, and I could not even endure
the sight of it. I found the temperature and the air stifling.
Fatigue paralysed my limbs. More than once I dropped down motionless.
Then there was a halt; and my uncle and the Icelander did their best
to restore me. But I saw that the former was struggling painfully
against excessive fatigue and the tortures of thirst.

At last, on Tuesday, July 8, we arrived on our hands and knees, and
half dead, at the junction of the two roads. There I dropped like a
lifeless lump, extended on the lava soil. It was ten in the morning.

Hans and my uncle, clinging to the wall, tried to nibble a few bits
of biscuit. Long moans escaped from my swollen lips.

After some time my uncle approached me and raised me in his arms.

"Poor boy!" said he, in genuine tones of compassion.

I was touched with these words, not being accustomed to see the
excitable Professor in a softened mood. I grasped his trembling hands
in mine. He let me hold them and looked at me. His eyes were
moistened.

Then I saw him take the flask that was hanging at his side. To my
amazement he placed it on my lips.

"Drink!" said he.

Had I heard him? Was my uncle beside himself? I stared at, him
stupidly, and felt as if I could not understand him.

"Drink!" he said again.

And raising his flask he emptied it every drop between my lips.

Oh! infinite pleasure! a slender sip of water came to moisten my
burning mouth. It was but one sip but it was enough to recall my
ebbing life.

I thanked my uncle with clasped hands.

"Yes," he said, "a draught of water; but it is the very last--you
hear!--the last. I had kept it as a precious treasure at the bottom
of my flask. Twenty times, nay, a hundred times, have I fought
against a frightful impulse to drink it off. But no, Axel, I kept it
for you."

"My dear uncle," I said, whilst hot tears trickled down my face.

"Yes, my poor boy, I knew that as soon as you arrived at these cross
roads you would drop half dead, and I kept my last drop of water to
reanimate you."

"Thank you, thank you," I said. Although my thirst was only partially
quenched, yet some strength had returned. The muscles of my throat,
until then contracted, now relaxed again; and the inflammation of my
lips abated somewhat; and I was now able to speak. .

"Let us see," I said, "we have now but one thing to do. We have no
water; we must go back."

While I spoke my uncle avoided looking at me; he hung his head down;
his eyes avoided mine.

"We must return," I exclaimed vehemently; "we must go back on our way
to Snfell. May God give us strength to climb up the crater again!"

"Return!" said my uncle, as if he was rather answering himself than
me.

"Yes, return, without the loss of a minute."

A long silence followed.

"So then, Axel," replied the Professor ironically, "you have found no
courage or energy in these few drops of water?"

"Courage?"

"I see you just as feeble-minded as you were before, and still
expressing only despair!"

What sort of a man was this I had to do with, and what schemes was he
now revolving in his fearless mind?

"What! you won't go back?"

"Should I renounce this expedition just when we have the fairest
chance of success! Never!"

"Then must we resign ourselves to destruction?"

"No, Axel, no; go back. Hans will go with you. Leave me to myself!"

"Leave you here!"

"Leave me, I tell you. I have undertaken this expedition. I will
carry it out to the end, and I will not return. Go, Axel, go!"

My uncle was in high state of excitement. His voice, which had for a
moment been tender and gentle, had now become hard and threatening.
He was struggling with gloomy resolutions against impossibilities. I
would not leave him in this bottomless abyss, and on the other hand
the instinct of self-preservation prompted me to fly.

The guide watched this scene with his usual phlegmatic unconcern. Yet
he understood perfectly well what was going on between his two
companions. The gestures themselves were sufficient to show that we
were each bent on taking a different road; but Hans seemed to take no
part in a question upon which depended his life. He was ready to
start at a given signal, or to stay, if his master so willed it.

How I wished at this moment I could have made him understand me. My
words, my complaints, my sorrow would have had some influence over
that frigid nature. Those dangers which our guide could not
understand I could have demonstrated and proved to him. Together we
might have over-ruled the obstinate Professor; if it were needed, we
might perhaps have compelled him to regain the heights of Snfell.

I drew near to Hans. I placed my hand upon his. He made no movement.
My parted lips sufficiently revealed my sufferings. The Icelander
slowly moved his head, and calmly pointing to my uncle said:

"Master."

"Master!" I shouted; "you madman! no, he is not the master of our
life; we must fly, we must drag him. Do you hear me? Do you
understand?"

I had seized Hans by the arm. I wished to oblige him to rise. I
strove with him. My uncle interposed.

"Be calm, Axel! you will get nothing from that immovable servant.
Therefore, listen to my proposal."

I crossed my arms, and confronted my uncle boldly.

"The want of water," he said, "is the only obstacle in our way. In
this eastern gallery made up of lavas, schists, and coal, we have not
met with a single particle of moisture. Perhaps we shall be more
fortunate if we follow the western tunnel."

I shook my head incredulously.

"Hear me to the end," the Professor went on with a firm voice.
"Whilst you were lying there motionless, I went to examine the
conformation of that gallery. It penetrates directly downward, and in
a few hours it will bring us to the granite rocks. There we must meet
with abundant springs. The nature of the rock assures me of this, and
instinct agrees with logic to support my conviction. Now, this is my
proposal. When Columbus asked of his ships' crews for three days more
to discover a new world, those crews, disheartened and sick as they
were, recognised the justice of the claim, and he discovered America.
I am the Columbus of this nether world, and I only ask for one more
day. If in a single day I have not met with the water that we want, I
swear to you we will return to the surface of the earth."

In spite of my irritation I was moved with these words, as well as
with the violence my uncle was doing to his own wishes in making so
hazardous a proposal.

"Well," I said, "do as you will, and God reward your superhuman
energy. You have now but a few hours to tempt fortune. Let us start!"




CHAPTER XXII.

TOTAL FAILURE OF WATER


This time the descent commenced by the new gallery. Hans walked first
as was his custom.

We had not gone a hundred yards when the Professor, moving his
lantern along the walls, cried:

"Here are primitive rocks. Now we are in the right way. Forward!"

When in its early stages the earth was slowly cooling, its
contraction gave rise in its crust to disruptions, distortions,
fissures, and chasms. The passage through which we were moving was
such a fissure, through which at one time granite poured out in a
molten state. Its thousands of windings formed an inextricable
labyrinth through the primeval mass.

As fast as we descended, the succession of beds forming the primitive
foundation came out with increasing distinctness. Geologists consider
this primitive matter to be the base of the mineral crust of the
earth, and have ascertained it to be composed of three different
formations, schist, gneiss, and mica schist, resting upon that
unchangeable foundation, the granite.

Never had mineralogists found themselves in so marvellous a situation
to study nature in situ. What the boring machine, an insensible,
inert instrument, was unable to bring to the surface of the inner
structure of the globe, we were able to peruse with our own eyes and
handle with our own hands.

Through the beds of schist, coloured with delicate shades of green,
ran in winding course threads of copper and manganese, with traces of
platinum and gold. I thought, what riches are here buried at an
unapproachable depth in the earth, hidden for ever from the covetous
eyes of the human race! These treasures have been buried at such a
profound depth by the convulsions of primeval times that they run no
chance of ever being molested by the pickaxe or the spade.

To the schists succeeded gneiss, partially stratified, remarkable for
the parallelism and regularity of its lamina, then mica schists, laid
in large plates or flakes, revealing their lamellated structure by
the sparkle of the white shining mica.

The light from our apparatus, reflected from the small facets of
quartz, shot sparkling rays at every angle, and I seemed to be moving
through a diamond, within which the quickly darting rays broke across
each other in a thousand flashing coruscations.

About six o'clock this brilliant fete of illuminations underwent a
sensible abatement of splendour, then almost ceased. The walls
assumed a crystallised though sombre appearance; mica was more
closely mingled with the feldspar and quartz to form the proper rocky
foundations of the earth, which bears without distortion or crushing
the weight of the four terrestrial systems. We were immured within
prison walls of granite.

It was eight in the evening. No signs of water had yet appeared. I
was suffering horribly. My uncle strode on. He refused to stop. He
was listening anxiously for the murmur of distant springs. But, no,
there was dead silence.

And now my limbs were failing beneath me. I resisted pain and
torture, that I might not stop my uncle, which would have driven him
to despair, for the day was drawing near to its end, and it was his
last.

At last I failed utterly; I uttered a cry and fell.

"Come to me, I am dying."

My uncle retraced his steps. He gazed upon me with his arms crossed;
then these muttered words passed his lips:

"It's all over!"

The last thing I saw was a fearful gesture of rage, and my eyes
closed.

When I reopened them I saw my two companions motionless and rolled up
in their coverings. Were they asleep? As for me, I could not get one
moment's sleep. I was suffering too keenly, and what embittered my
thoughts was that there was no remedy. My uncle's last words echoed
painfully in my ears: "it's all over!" For in such a fearful state of
debility it was madness to think of ever reaching the upper world
again.

We had above us a league and a half of terrestrial crust. The weight
of it seemed to be crushing down upon my shoulders. I felt weighed
down, and I exhausted myself with imaginary violent exertions to turn
round upon my granite couch.

A few hours passed away. A deep silence reigned around us, the
silence of the grave. No sound could reach us through walls, the
thinnest of which were five miles thick.

Yet in the midst of my stupefaction I seemed to be aware of a noise.
It was dark down the tunnel, but I seemed to see the Icelander
vanishing from our sight with the lamp in his hand.

Why was he leaving us? Was Hans going to forsake us? My uncle was
fast asleep. I wanted to shout, but my voice died upon my parched and
swollen lips. The darkness became deeper, and the last sound died
away in the far distance.

"Hans has abandoned us," I cried. "Hans! Hans!"

But these words were only spoken within me. They went no farther. Yet
after the first moment of terror I felt ashamed of suspecting a man
of such extraordinary faithfulness. Instead of ascending he was
descending the gallery. An evil design would have taken him up not
down. This reflection restored me to calmness, and I turned to other
thoughts. None but some weighty motive could have induced so quiet a
man to forfeit his sleep. Was he on a journey of discovery? Had he
during the silence of the night caught a sound, a murmuring of
something in the distance, which had failed to affect my hearing?




CHAPTER XXIII.

WATER DISCOVERED


For a whole hour I was trying to work out in my delirious brain the
reasons which might have influenced this seemingly tranquil huntsman.
The absurdest notions ran in utter confusion through my mind. I
thought madness was coming on!

But at last a noise of footsteps was heard in the dark abyss. Hans
was approaching. A flickering light was beginning to glimmer on the
wall of our darksome prison; then it came out full at the mouth of
the gallery. Hans appeared.

He drew close to my uncle, laid his hand upon his shoulder, and
gently woke him. My uncle rose up.

"What is the matter?" he asked.

"_Watten!_" replied the huntsman.

No doubt under the inspiration of intense pain everybody becomes
endowed with the gift of divers tongues. I did not know a word of
Danish, yet instinctively I understood the word he had uttered.

"Water! water!" I cried, clapping my hands and gesticulating like a
madman.

"Water!" repeated my uncle. "Hvar?" he asked, in Icelandic.

"_Nedat,_" replied Hans.

"Where? Down below!" I understood it all. I seized the hunter's
hands, and pressed them while he looked on me without moving a muscle
of his countenance.

The preparations for our departure were not long in making, and we
were soon on our way down a passage inclining two feet in seven. In
an hour we had gone a mile and a quarter, and descended two thousand
feet.

Then I began to hear distinctly quite a new sound of something
running within the thickness of the granite wall, a kind of dull,
dead rumbling, like distant thunder. During the first part of our
walk, not meeting with the promised spring, I felt my agony
returning; but then my uncle acquainted me with the cause of the
strange noise.

"Hans was not mistaken," he said. "What you hear is the rushing of a
torrent."

"A torrent?" I exclaimed.

"There can be no doubt; a subterranean river is flowing around us."

We hurried forward in the greatest excitement. I was no longer
sensible of my fatigue. This murmuring of waters close at hand was
already refreshing me. It was audibly increasing. The torrent, after
having for some time flowed over our heads, was now running within
the left wall, roaring and rushing. Frequently I touched the wall,
hoping to feel some indications of moisture: But there was no hope
here.

Yet another half hour, another half league was passed.

Then it became clear that the hunter had gone no farther. Guided by
an instinct peculiar to mountaineers he had as it were felt this
torrent through the rock; but he had certainly seen none of the
precious liquid; he had drunk nothing himself.

Soon it became evident that if we continued our walk we should widen
the distance between ourselves and the stream, the noise of which was
becoming fainter.

We returned. Hans stopped where the torrent seemed closest. I sat
near the wall, while the waters were flowing past me at a distance of
two feet with extreme violence. But there was a thick granite wall
between us and the object of our desires.

Without reflection, without asking if there were any means of
procuring the water, I gave way to a movement of despair.

Hans glanced at me with, I thought, a smile of compassion.

He rose and took the lamp. I followed him. He moved towards the wall.
I looked on. He applied his ear against the dry stone, and moved it
slowly to and fro, listening intently. I perceived at once that he
was examining to find the exact place where the torrent could be
heard the loudest. He met with that point on the left side of the
tunnel, at three feet from the ground.

I was stirred up with excitement. I hardly dared guess what the
hunter was about to do. But I could not but understand, and applaud
and cheer him on, when I saw him lay hold of the pickaxe to make an
attack upon the rock.

"We are saved!" I cried.

"Yes," cried my uncle, almost frantic with excitement. "Hans is
right. Capital fellow! Who but he would have thought of it?"

Yes; who but he? Such an expedient, however simple, would never have
entered into our minds. True, it seemed most hazardous to strike a
blow of the hammer in this part of the earth's structure. Suppose
some displacement should occur and crush us all! Suppose the torrent,
bursting through, should drown us in a sudden flood! There was
nothing vain in these fancies. But still no fears of falling rocks or
rushing floods could stay us now; and our thirst was so intense that,
to satisfy it, we would have dared the waves of the north Atlantic.

Hans set about the task which my uncle and I together could not have
accomplished. If our impatience had armed our hands with power, we
should have shattered the rock into a thousand fragments. Not so
Hans. Full of self possession, he calmly wore his way through the
rock with a steady succession of light and skilful strokes, working
through an aperture six inches wide at the outside. I could hear a
louder noise of flowing waters, and I fancied I could feel the
delicious fluid refreshing my parched lips.

The pick had soon penetrated two feet into the granite partition, and
our man had worked for above an hour. I was in an agony of
impatience. My uncle wanted to employ stronger measures, and I had
some difficulty in dissuading him; still he had just taken a pickaxe
in his hand, when a sudden hissing was heard, and a jet of water
spurted out with violence against the opposite wall.

Hans, almost thrown off his feet by the violence of the shock,
uttered a cry of grief and disappointment, of which I soon under-.
stood the cause, when plunging my hands into the spouting torrent, I
withdrew them in haste, for the water was scalding hot.

"The water is at the boiling point," I cried.

"Well, never mind, let it cool," my uncle replied.

The tunnel was filling with steam, whilst a stream was forming, which
by degrees wandered away into subterranean windings, and soon we had
the satisfaction of swallowing our first draught.

Could anything be more delicious than the sensation that our burning
intolerable thirst was passing away, and leaving us to enjoy comfort
and pleasure? But where was this water from? No matter. It was water;
and though still warm, it brought life back to the dying. I kept
drinking without stopping, and almost without tasting.

At last after a most delightful time of reviving energy, I cried,
"Why, this is a chalybeate spring!"

"Nothing could be better for the digestion," said my uncle. "It is
highly impregnated with iron. It will be as good for us as going to
the Spa, or to Tplitz."

"Well, it is delicious!"

"Of course it is, water should be, found six miles underground. It
has an inky flavour, which is not at all unpleasant. What a capital
source of strength Hans has found for us here. We will call it after
his name."

"Agreed," I cried.

And Hansbach it was from that moment.

Hans was none the prouder. After a moderate draught, he went quietly
into a corner to rest.

"Now," I said, "we must not lose this water."

"What is the use of troubling ourselves?" my uncle, replied. "I fancy
it will never fail."

"Never mind, we cannot be sure; let us fill the water bottle and our
flasks, and then stop up the opening."

My advice was followed so far as getting in a supply; but the
stopping up of the hole was not so easy to accomplish. It was in vain
that we took up fragments of granite, and stuffed them in with tow,
we only scalded our hands without succeeding. The pressure was too
great, and our efforts were fruitless.

"It is quite plain," said I, "that the higher body of this water is
at a considerable elevation. The force of the jet shows that."

"No doubt," answered my uncle. "If this column of water is 32,000
feet high--that is, from the surface of the earth, it is equal to
the weight of a thousand atmospheres. But I have got an idea."

"Well?"

"Why should we trouble ourselves to stop the stream from coming out
at all?"

"Because--" Well, I could not assign a reason.

"When our flasks are empty, where shall we fill them again? Can we
tell that?"

No; there was no certainty.

"Well, let us allow the water to run on. It will flow down, and will
both guide and refresh us."

"That is well planned," I cried. "With this stream for our guide,
there is no reason why we should not succeed in our undertaking."

"Ah, my boy! you agree with me now," cried the Professor, laughing.

"I agree with you most heartily."

"Well, let us rest awhile; and then we will start again."

I was forgetting that it was night. The chronometer soon informed me
of that fact; and in a very short time, refreshed and thankful, we
all three fell into a sound sleep.




CHAPTER XXIV.

WELL SAID, OLD MOLE! CANST THOU WORK I' THE GROUND SO FAST?


By the next day we had forgotten all our sufferings. At first, I was
wondering that I was no longer thirsty, and I was for asking for the
reason. The answer came in the murmuring of the stream at my feet.

We breakfasted, and drank of this excellent chalybeate water. I felt
wonderfully stronger, and quite decided upon pushing on. Why should
not so firmly convinced a man as my uncle, furnished with so
industrious a guide as Hans, and accompanied by so determined a
nephew as myself, go on to final success? Such were the magnificent
plans which struggled for mastery within me. If it had been proposed
to me to return to the summit of Snfell, I should have indignantly
declined.

Most fortunately, all we had to do was to descend.

"Let us start!" I cried, awakening by my shouts the echoes of the
vaulted hollows of the earth.

On Thursday, at 8 a.m., we started afresh. The granite tunnel winding
from side to side, earned us past unexpected turns, and seemed almost
to form a labyrinth; but, on the whole, its direction seemed to be
south-easterly. My uncle never ceased to consult his compass, to keep
account of the ground gone over.

The gallery dipped down a very little way from the horizontal,
scarcely more than two inches in a fathom, and the stream ran gently
murmuring at our feet. I compared it to a friendly genius guiding us
underground, and caressed with my hand the soft naiad, whose
comforting voice accompanied our steps. With my reviving spirits
these mythological notions seemed to come unbidden.

As for my uncle, he was beginning to storm against the horizontal
road. He loved nothing better than a vertical path; but this way
seemed indefinitely prolonged, and instead of sliding along the
hypothenuse as we were now doing, he would willingly have dropped
down the terrestrial radius. But there was no help for it, and as
long as we were approaching the centre at all we felt that we must
not complain.

From time to time, a steeper path appeared; our naiad then began to
tumble before us with a hoarser murmur, and we went down with her to
a greater depth.

On the whole, that day and the next we made considerable way
horizontally, very little vertically.

On Friday evening, the 10th of July, according to our calculations,
we were thirty leagues south-east of Rejkiavik, and at a depth of two
leagues and a half.

At our feet there now opened a frightful abyss. My uncle, however,
was not to be daunted, and he clapped his hands at the steepness of
the descent.

"This will take us a long way," he cried, "and without much
difficulty; for the projections in the rock form quite a staircase."

The ropes were so fastened by Hans as to guard against accident, and
the descent commenced. I can hardly call it perilous, for I was
beginning to be familiar with this kind of exercise.

This well, or abyss, was a narrow cleft in the mass of the granite,
called by geologists a 'fault,' and caused by the unequal cooling of
the globe of the earth. If it had at one time been a passage for
eruptive matter thrown out by Snfell, I still could not understand
why no trace was left of its passage. We kept going down a kind of
winding staircase, which seemed almost to have been made by the hand
of man.

Every quarter of an hour we were obliged to halt, to take a little
necessary repose and restore the action of our limbs. We then sat
down upon a fragment of rock, and we talked as we ate and drank from
the stream.

Of course, down this fault the Hansbach fell in a cascade, and lost
some of its volume; but there was enough and to spare to slake our
thirst. Besides, when the incline became more gentle, it would of
course resume its peaceable course. At this moment it reminded me of
my worthy uncle, in his frequent fits of impatience and anger, while
below it ran with the calmness of the Icelandic hunter.

On the 6th and 7th of July we kept following the spiral curves of
this singular well, penetrating in actual distance no more than two
leagues; but being carried to a depth of five leagues below the level
of the sea. But on the 8th, about noon, the fault took, towards the
south-east, a much gentler slope, one of about forty-five degrees.

Then the road became monotonously easy. It could not be otherwise,
for there was no landscape to vary the stages of our journey.

On Wednesday, the 15th, we were seven leagues underground, and had
travelled fifty leagues away from Snfell. Although we were tired,
our health was perfect, and the medicine chest had not yet had
occasion to be opened.

My uncle noted every hour the indications of the compass, the
chronometer, the aneroid, and the thermometer the very same which he
has published in his scientific report of our journey. It was
therefore not difficult to know exactly our whereabouts. When he told
me that we had gone fifty leagues horizontally, I could not repress
an exclamation of astonishment, at the thought that we had now long
left Iceland behind us.

"What is the matter?" he cried.

"I was reflecting that if your calculations are correct we are no
longer under Iceland."

"Do you think so?"

"I am not mistaken," I said, and examining the map, I added, "We have
passed Cape Portland, and those fifty leagues bring us under the wide
expanse of ocean."

"Under the sea," my uncle repeated, rubbing his hands with delight.

"Can it be?" I said. "Is the ocean spread above our heads?"

"Of course, Axel. What can be more natural? At Newcastle are there
not coal mines extending far under the sea?"

It was all very well for the Professor to call this so simple, but I
could not feel quite easy at the thought that the boundless ocean was
rolling over my head. And yet it really mattered very little whether
it was the plains and mountains that covered our heads, or the
Atlantic waves, as long as we were arched over by solid granite. And,
besides, I was getting used to this idea; for the tunnel, now running
straight, now winding as capriciously in its inclines as in its
turnings, but constantly preserving its south-easterly direction, and
always running deeper, was gradually carrying us to very great depths
indeed.

Four days later, Saturday, the 18th of July, in the evening, we
arrived at a kind of vast grotto; and here my uncle paid Hans his
weekly wages, and it was settled that the next day, Sunday, should be
a day of rest.




CHAPTER XXV.

DE PROFUNDIS


I therefore awoke next day relieved from the preoccupation of an
immediate start. Although we were in the very deepest of known
depths, there was something not unpleasant about it. And, besides, we
were beginning to get accustomed to this troglodyte [1] life. I no
longer thought of sun, moon, and stars, trees, houses, and towns, nor
of any of those terrestrial superfluities which are necessaries of
men who live upon the earth's surface. Being fossils, we looked upon
all those things as mere jokes.

The grotto was an immense apartment. Along its granite floor ran our
faithful stream. At this distance from its spring the water was
scarcely tepid, and we drank of it with pleasure.

After breakfast the Professor gave a few hours to the arrangement of
his daily notes.

"First," said he, "I will make a calculation to ascertain our exact
position. I hope, after our return, to draw a map of our journey,
which will be in reality a vertical section of the globe, containing
the track of our expedition."

"That will be curious, uncle; but are your observations sufficiently
accurate to enable you to do this correctly?"

"Yes; I have everywhere observed the angles and the inclines. I am
sure there is no error. Let us see where we are now. Take your
compass, and note the direction."

I looked, and replied carefully:

[1] tpwgln, a hole; dnw, to creep into. The name of an Ethiopian
tribe who lived in caves and holes. ??????, a hole, and ???, to creep
into.

"South-east by east."

"Well," answered the Professor, after a rapid calculation, "I infer
that we have gone eighty-five leagues since we started."

"Therefore we are under mid-Atlantic?"

"To be sure we are."

"And perhaps at this very moment there is a storm above, and ships
over our heads are being rudely tossed by the tempest."

"Quite probable."

"And whales are lashing the roof of our prison with their tails?"

"It may be, Axel, but they won't shake us here. But let us go back to
our calculation. Here we are eighty-five leagues south-east of
Snfell, and I reckon that we are at a depth of sixteen leagues."

"Sixteen leagues?" I cried.

"No doubt."

"Why, this is the very limit assigned by science to the thickness of
the crust of the earth."

"I don't deny it."

"And here, according to the law of increasing temperature, there
ought to be a heat of 2,732 Fahr.!"

"So there should, my lad."

"And all this solid granite ought to be running in fusion."

"You see that it is not so, and that, as so often happens, facts come
to overthrow theories."

"I am obliged to agree; but, after all, it is surprising."

"What does the thermometer say?"

"Twenty-seven, six tenths (82 Fahr.)."

"Therefore the savants are wrong by 2,705, and the proportional
increase is a mistake. Therefore Humphry Davy was right, and I am not
wrong in following him. What do you say now?"

"Nothing."

In truth, I had a good deal to say. I gave way in no respect to
Davy's theory. I still held to the central heat, although I did not
feel its effects. I preferred to admit in truth, that this chimney of
an extinct volcano, lined with lavas, which are non-conductors of
heat, did not suffer the heat to pass through its walls.

But without stopping to look up new arguments I simply took up our
situation such as it was.

"Well, admitting all your calculations to be quite correct, you must
allow me to draw one rigid result therefrom."

"What is it. Speak freely."

"At the latitude of Iceland, where we now are, the radius of the
earth, the distance from the centre to the surface is about 1,583
leagues; let us say in round numbers 1,600 leagues, or 4,800 miles.
Out of 1,600 leagues we have gone twelve!"

"So you say."

"And these twelve at a cost of 85 leagues diagonally?"

"Exactly so."

"In twenty days?"

"Yes."

"Now, sixteen leagues are the hundredth part of the earth's radius.
At this rate we shall be two thousand days, or nearly five years and
a half, in getting to the centre."

No answer was vouchsafed to this rational conclusion. "Without
reckoning, too, that if a vertical depth of sixteen leagues can be
attained only by a diagonal descent of eighty-four, it follows that
we must go eight thousand miles in a south-easterly direction; so
that we shall emerge from some point in the earth's circumference
instead of getting to the centre!"

"Confusion to all your figures, and all your hypotheses besides,"
shouted my uncle in a sudden rage. "What is the basis of them all?
How do you know that this passage does not run straight to our
destination? Besides, there is a precedent. What one man has done,
another may do."

"I hope so; but, still, I may be permitted--"

"You shall have my leave to hold your tongue, Axel, but not to talk
in that irrational way."

I could see the awful Professor bursting through my uncle's skin, and
I took timely warning.

"Now look at your aneroid. What does that say?"

"It says we are under considerable pressure."

"Very good; so you see that by going gradually down, and getting
accustomed to the density of the atmosphere, we don't suffer at all."

"Nothing, except a little pain in the ears."

"That's nothing, and you may get rid of even that by quick breathing
whenever you feel the pain."

"Exactly so," I said, determined not to say a word that might cross
my uncle's prejudices. "There is even positive pleasure in living in
this dense atmosphere. Have you observed how intense sound is down
here?"

"No doubt it is. A deaf man would soon learn to hear perfectly."

"But won't this density augment?"

"Yes; according to a rather obscure law. It is well known that the
weight of bodies diminishes as fast as we descend. You know that it
is at the surface of the globe that weight is most sensibly felt, and
that at the centre there is no weight at all."

"I am aware of that; but, tell me, will not air at last acquire the
density of water?"

"Of course, under a pressure of seven hundred and ten atmospheres."

"And how, lower down still?"

"Lower down the density will still increase."

"But how shall we go down then."

"Why, we must fill our pockets with stones."

"Well, indeed, my worthy uncle, you are never at a loss for an
answer."

I dared venture no farther into the region of probabilities, for I
might presently have stumbled upon an impossibility, which would have
brought the Professor on the scene when he was not wanted.

Still, it was evident that the air, under a pressure which might
reach that of thousands of atmospheres, would at last reach the solid
state, and then, even if our bodies could resist the strain, we
should be stopped, and no reasonings would be able to get us on any
farther.

But I did not advance this argument. My uncle would have met it with
his inevitable Saknussemm, a precedent which possessed no weight with
me; for even if the journey of the learned Icelander were really
attested, there was one very simple answer, that in the sixteenth
century there was neither barometer or aneroid and therefore
Saknussemm could not tell how far he had gone.

But I kept this objection to myself, and waited the course of events.

The rest of the day was passed in calculations and in conversations.
I remained a steadfast adherent of the opinions of Professor
Liedenbrock, and I envied the stolid indifference of Hans, who,
without going into causes and effects, went on with his eyes shut
wherever his destiny guided him.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE WORST PERIL OF ALL


It must be confessed that hitherto things had not gone on so badly,
and that I had small reason to complain. If our difficulties became
no worse, we might hope to reach our end. And to what a height of
scientific glory we should then attain! I had become quite a
Liedenbrock in my reasonings; seriously I had. But would this state
of things last in the strange place we had come to? Perhaps it might.

For several days steeper inclines, some even frightfully near to the
perpendicular, brought us deeper and deeper into the mass of the
interior of the earth. Some days we advanced nearer to the centre by
a league and a half, or nearly two leagues. These were perilous
descents, in which the skill and marvellous coolness of Hans were
invaluable to us. That unimpassioned Icelander devoted himself with
incomprehensible deliberation; and, thanks to him, we crossed many a
dangerous spot which we should never have cleared alone.

But his habit of silence gained upon him day by day, and was
infecting us. External objects produce decided effects upon the
brain. A man shut up between four walls soon loses the power to
associate words and ideas together. How many prisoners in solitary
confinement become idiots, if not mad, for want of exercise for the
thinking faculty!

During the fortnight following our last conversation, no incident
occurred worthy of being recorded. But I have good reason for
remembering one very serious event which took place at this time, and
of which I could scarcely now forget the smallest details.

By the 7th of August our successive descents had brought us to a
depth of thirty leagues; that is, that for a space of thirty leagues
there were over our heads solid beds of rock, ocean, continents, and
towns. We must have been two hundred leagues from Iceland.

On that day the tunnel went down a gentle slope. I was ahead of the
others. My uncle was carrying one of Ruhmkorff's lamps and I the
other. I was examining the beds of granite.

Suddenly turning round I observed that I was alone.

Well, well, I thought; I have been going too fast, or Hans and my
uncle have stopped on the way. Come, this won't do; I must join them.
Fortunately there is not much of an ascent.

I retraced my steps. I walked for a quarter of an hour. I gazed into
the darkness. I shouted. No reply: my voice was lost in the midst of
the cavernous echoes which alone replied to my call.

I began to feel uneasy. A shudder ran through me.

"Calmly!" I said aloud to myself, "I am sure to find my companions
again. There are not two roads. I was too far ahead. I will return!"

For half an hour I climbed up. I listened for a call, and in that
dense atmosphere a voice could reach very far. But there was a dreary
silence in all that long gallery. I stopped. I could not believe that
I was lost. I was only bewildered for a time, not lost. I was sure I
should find my way again.

"Come," I repeated, "since there is but one road, and they are on it,
I must find them again. I have but to ascend still. Unless, indeed,
missing me, and supposing me to be behind, they too should have gone
back. But even in this case I have only to make the greater haste. I
shall find them, I am sure."

I repeated these words in the fainter tones of a half-convinced man.
Besides, to associate even such simple ideas with words, and reason
with them, was a work of time.

A doubt then seized upon me. Was I indeed in advance when we became
separated? Yes, to be sure I was. Hans was after me, preceding my
uncle. He had even stopped for a while to strap his baggage better
over his shoulders. I could remember this little incident. It was at
that very moment that I must have gone on.

Besides, I thought, have not I a guarantee that I shall not lose my
way, a clue in the labyrinth, that cannot be broken, my faithful
stream? I have but to trace it back, and I must come upon them.

This conclusion revived my spirits, and I resolved to resume my march
without loss of time.

How I then blessed my uncle's foresight in preventing the hunter from
stopping up the hole in the granite. This beneficent spring, after
having satisfied our thirst on the road, would now be my guide among
the windings of the terrestrial crust.

Before starting afresh I thought a wash would do me good. I stooped
to bathe my face in the Hansbach.

To my stupefaction and utter dismay my feet trod only--the rough dry
granite. The stream was no longer at my feet.




CHAPTER XXVII.

LOST IN THE BOWELS OF THE EARTH


To describe my despair would be impossible. No words could tell it. I
was buried alive, with the prospect before me of dying of hunger and
thirst.

Mechanically I swept the ground with my hands. How dry and hard the
rock seemed to me!

But how had I left the course of the stream? For it was a terrible
fact that it no longer ran at my side. Then I understood the reason
of that fearful, silence, when for the last time I listened to hear
if any sound from my companions could reach my ears. At the moment
when I left the right road I had not noticed the absence of the
stream. It is evident that at that moment a deviation had presented
itself before me, whilst the Hansbach, following the caprice of
another incline, had gone with my companions away into unknown depths.

How was I to return? There was not a trace of their footsteps or of
my own, for the foot left no mark upon the granite floor. I racked my
brain for a solution of this impracticable problem. One word
described my position. Lost!

Lost at an immeasurable depth! Thirty leagues of rock seemed to weigh
upon my shoulders with a dreadful pressure. I felt crushed.

I tried to carry back my ideas to things on the surface of the earth.
I could scarcely succeed. Hamburg, the house in the Knigstrasse, my
poor Gruben, all that busy world underneath which I was wandering
about, was passing in rapid confusion before my terrified memory. I
could revive with vivid reality all the incidents of our voyage,
Iceland, M. Fridrikssen, Snfell. I said to myself that if, in such a
position as I was now in, I was fool enough to cling to one glimpse
of hope, it would be madness, and that the best thing I could do was
to despair.

What human power could restore me to the light of the sun by rending
asunder the huge arches of rock which united over my head,
buttressing each other with impregnable strength? Who could place my
feet on the right path, and bring me back to my company?

"Oh, my uncle!" burst from my lips in the tone of despair.

It was my only word of reproach, for I knew how much he must be
suffering in seeking me, wherever he might be.

When I saw myself thus far removed from all earthly help I had
recourse to heavenly succour. The remembrance of my childhood, the
recollection of my mother, whom I had only known in my tender early
years, came back to me, and I knelt in prayer imploring for the
Divine help of which I was so little worthy.

This return of trust in God's providence allayed the turbulence of my
fears, and I was enabled to concentrate upon my situation all the
force of my intelligence.

I had three days' provisions with me and my flask was full. But I
could not remain alone for long. Should I go up or down?

Up, of course; up continually.

I must thus arrive at the point where I had left the stream, that
fatal turn in the road. With the stream at my feet, I might hope to
regain the summit of Snfell.

Why had I not thought of that sooner? Here was evidently a chance of
safety. The most pressing duty was to find out again the course of
the Hansbach. I rose, and leaning upon my iron-pointed stick I
ascended the gallery. The slope was rather steep. I walked on without
hope but without indecision, like a man who has made up his mind.

For half an hour I met with no obstacle. I tried to recognise my way
by the form of the tunnel, by the projections of certain rocks, by
the disposition of the fractures. But no particular sign appeared,
and I soon saw that this gallery could not bring me back to the
turning point. It came to an abrupt end. I struck against an
impenetrable wall, and fell down upon the rock.

Unspeakable despair then seized upon me. I lay overwhelmed, aghast!
My last hope was shattered against this granite wall.

Lost in this labyrinth, whose windings crossed each other in all
directions, it was no use to think of flight any longer. Here I must
die the most dreadful of deaths. And, strange to say, the thought
came across me that when some day my petrified remains should be
found thirty leagues below the surface in the bowels of the earth,
the discovery might lead to grave scientific discussions.

I tried to speak aloud, but hoarse sounds alone passed my dry lips. I
panted for breath.

In the midst of my agony a new terror laid hold of me. In falling my
lamp had got wrong. I could not set it right, and its light was
paling and would soon disappear altogether.

I gazed painfully upon the luminous current growing weaker and weaker
in the wire coil. A dim procession of moving shadows seemed slowly
unfolding down the darkening walls. I scarcely dared to shut my eyes
for one moment, for fear of losing the least glimmer of this precious
light. Every instant it seemed about to vanish and the dense
blackness to come rolling in palpably upon me.

One last trembling glimmer shot feebly up. I watched it in trembling
and anxiety; I drank it in as if I could preserve it, concentrating
upon it the full power of my eyes, as upon the very last sensation of
light which they were ever to experience, and the next moment I lay
in the heavy gloom of deep, thick, unfathomable darkness.

A terrible cry of anguish burst from me. Upon earth, in the midst of
the darkest night, light never abdicates its functions altogether. It
is still subtle and diffusive, but whatever little there may be, the
eye still catches that little. Here there was not an atom; the total
darkness made me totally blind.

Then I began to lose my head. I arose with my arms stretched out
before me, attempting painfully to feel my way. I began to run
wildly, hurrying through the inextricable maze, still descending,
still running through the substance of the earth's thick crust, a
struggling denizen of geological 'faults,' crying, shouting, yelling,
soon bruised by contact with the jagged rock, falling and rising
again bleeding, trying to drink the blood which covered my face, and
even waiting for some rock to shatter my skull against.

I shall never know whither my mad career took me. After the lapse of
some hours, no doubt exhausted, I fell like a lifeless lump at the
foot of the wall, and lost all consciousness.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE RESCUE IN THE WHISPERING GALLERY


When I returned to partial life my face was wet with tears. How long
that state of insensibility had lasted I cannot say. I had no means
now of taking account of time. Never was solitude equal to this,
never had any living being been so utterly forsaken.

After my fall I had lost a good deal of blood. I felt it flowing over
me. Ah! how happy I should have been could I have died, and if death
were not yet to be gone through. I would think no longer. I drove
away every idea, and, conquered by my grief, I rolled myself to the
foot of the opposite wall.

Already I was feeling the approach of another faint, and was hoping
for complete annihilation, when a loud noise reached me. It was like
the distant rumble of continuous thunder, and I could hear its
sounding undulations rolling far away into the remote recesses of the
abyss.

Whence could this noise proceed? It must be from some phenomenon
proceeding in the great depths amidst which I lay helpless. Was it an
explosion of gas? Was it the fall of some mighty pillar of the globe?

I listened still. I wanted to know if the noise would be repeated. A
quarter of an hour passed away. Silence reigned in this gallery. I
could not hear even the beating of my heart.

Suddenly my ear, resting by chance against the wall, caught, or
seemed to catch, certain vague, indescribable, distant, articulate
sounds, as of words.

"This is a delusion," I thought.

But it was not. Listening more attentively, I heard in reality a
murmuring of voices. But my weakness prevented me from understanding
what the voices said. Yet it was language, I was sure of it.

For a moment I feared the words might be my own, brought back by the
echo. Perhaps I had been crying out unknown to myself. I closed my
lips firmly, and laid my ear against the wall again.

"Yes, truly, some one is speaking; those are words!"

Even a few feet from the wall I could hear distinctly. I succeeded in
catching uncertain, strange, undistinguishable words. They came as if
pronounced in low murmured whispers. The word '_forlorad_' was
several times repeated in a tone of sympathy and sorrow.

"Help!" I cried with all my might. "Help!"

I listened, I watched in the darkness for an answer, a cry, a mere
breath of sound, but nothing came. Some minutes passed. A whole world
of ideas had opened in my mind. I thought that my weakened voice
could never penetrate to my companions.

"It is they," I repeated. "What other men can be thirty leagues under
ground?"

I again began to listen. Passing my ear over the wall from one place
to another, I found the point where the voices seemed to be best
heard. The word '_forlorad_' again returned; then the rolling of
thunder which had roused me from my lethargy.

"No," I said, "no; it is not through such a mass that a voice can be
heard. I am surrounded by granite walls, and the loudest explosion
could never be heard here! This noise comes along the gallery. There
must be here some remarkable exercise of acoustic laws!"

I listened again, and this time, yes this time, I did distinctly hear
my name pronounced across the wide interval.

It was my uncle's own voice! He was talking to the guide. And
'_forlorad_' is a Danish word.

Then I understood it all. To make myself heard, I must speak along
this wall, which would conduct the sound of my voice just as wire
conducts electricity.

But there was no time to lose. If my companions moved but a few steps
away, the acoustic phenomenon would cease. I therefore approached the
wall, and pronounced these words as clearly as possible:

"Uncle Liedenbrock!"

I waited with the deepest anxiety. Sound does not travel with great
velocity. Even increased density air has no effect upon its rate of
travelling; it merely augments its intensity. Seconds, which seemed
ages, passed away, and at last these words reached me:

"Axel! Axel! is it you?"

. . . .

"Yes, yes," I replied.

. . . .

"My boy, where are you?"

. . . .

"Lost, in the deepest darkness."

. . . .

"Where is your lamp?"

. . . .

"It is out."

. . . .

"And the stream?"

. . . .

"Disappeared."

. . . .

"Axel, Axel, take courage!"

. . . .

"Wait! I am exhausted! I can't answer. Speak to me!"

. . . .

"Courage," resumed my uncle. "Don't speak. Listen to me. We have
looked for you up the gallery and down the gallery. Could not find
you. I wept for you, my poor boy. At last, supposing you were still
on the Hansbach, we fired our guns. Our voices are audible to each
other, but our hands cannot touch. But don't despair, Axel! It is a
great thing that we can hear each other."

. . . .

During this time I had been reflecting. A vague hope was returning to
my heart. There was one thing I must know to begin with. I placed my
lips close to the wall, saying:

"My uncle!"

. . . .

"My boy!" came to me after a few seconds.

. . . .

"We must know how far we are apart."

. . . .

"That is easy."

. . . .

"You have your chronometer?"

. . .

"Yes."

. . . .

"Well, take it. Pronounce my name, noting exactly the second when you
speak. I will repeat it as soon as it shall come to me, and you will
observe the exact moment when you get my answer."

"Yes; and half the time between my call and your answer will exactly
indicate that which my voice will take in coming to you."

. . . .

"Just so, my uncle."

. . . .

"Are you ready?"

. . . .

"Yes."

. . . . . .

"Now, attention. I am going to call your name."

. . . .

I put my ear to the wall, and as soon as the name 'Axel' came I
immediately replied "Axel," then waited.

. . . .

"Forty seconds," said my uncle. "Forty seconds between the two words;
so the sound takes twenty seconds in coming. Now, at the rate of
1,120 feet in a second, this is 22,400 feet, or four miles and a
quarter, nearly."

. . . .

"Four miles and a quarter!" I murmured.

. . . .

"It will soon be over, Axel."

. . . .

"Must I go up or down?"

. . . .

"Down--for this reason: We are in a vast chamber, with endless
galleries. Yours must lead into it, for it seems as if all the clefts
and fractures of the globe radiated round this vast cavern. So get
up, and begin walking. Walk on, drag yourself along, if necessary
slide down the steep places, and at the end you will find us ready to
receive you. Now begin moving."

. . . .

These words cheered me up.

"Good bye, uncle." I cried. "I am going. There will be no more voices
heard when once I have started. So good bye!"

. . . .

"Good bye, Axel, _au revoir!_"

. . . .

These were the last words I heard.

This wonderful underground conversation, carried on with a distance
of four miles and a quarter between us, concluded with these words of
hope. I thanked God from my heart, for it was He who had conducted me
through those vast solitudes to the point where, alone of all others
perhaps, the voices of my companions could have reached me.

This acoustic effect is easily explained on scientific grounds. It
arose from the concave form of the gallery and the conducting power
of the rock. There are many examples of this propagation of sounds
which remain unheard in the intermediate space. I remember that a
similar phenomenon has been observed in many places; amongst others
on the internal surface of the gallery of the dome of St. Paul's in
London, and especially in the midst of the curious caverns among the
quarries near Syracuse, the most wonderful of which is called
Dionysius' Ear.

These remembrances came into my mind, and I clearly saw that since my
uncle's voice really reached me, there could be no obstacle between
us. Following the direction by which the sound came, of course I
should arrive in his presence, if my strength did not fail me.

I therefore rose; I rather dragged myself than walked. The slope was
rapid, and I slid down.

Soon the swiftness of the descent increased horribly, and threatened
to become a fall. I no longer had the strength to stop myself.

Suddenly there was no ground under me. I felt myself revolving in
air, striking and rebounding against the craggy projections of a
vertical gallery, quite a well; my head struck against a sharp corner
of the rock, and I became unconscious.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THALATTA! THALATTA!


When I came to myself, I was stretched in half darkness, covered with
thick coats and blankets. My uncle was watching over me, to discover
the least sign of life. At my first sigh he took my hand; when I
opened my eyes he uttered a cry of joy.

"He lives! he lives!" he cried.

"Yes, I am still alive," I answered feebly.

"My dear nephew," said my uncle, pressing me to his breast, "you are
saved."

I was deeply touched with the tenderness of his manner as he uttered
these words, and still more with the care with which he watched over
me. But such trials were wanted to bring out the Professor's tenderer
qualities.

At this moment Hans came, he saw my hand in my uncle's, and I may
safely say that there was joy in his countenance.

"_God dag,_" said he.

"How do you do, Hans? How are you? And now, uncle, tell me where we
are at the present moment?"

"To-morrow, Axel, to-morrow. Now you are too faint and weak. I have
bandaged your head with compresses which must not be disturbed. Sleep
now, and to-morrow I will tell you all."

"But do tell me what time it is, and what day."

"It is Sunday, the 8th of August, and it is ten at night. You must
ask me no more questions until the 10th."

In truth I was very weak, and my eyes involuntarily closed. I wanted
a good night's rest; and I therefore went off to sleep, with the
knowledge that I had been four long days alone in the heart of the
earth.

Next morning, on awakening, I looked round me. My couch, made up of
all our travelling gear, was in a charming grotto, adorned with
splendid stalactites, and the soil of which was a fine sand. It was
half light. There was no torch, no lamp, yet certain mysterious
glimpses of light came from without through a narrow opening in the
grotto. I heard too a vague and indistinct noise, something like the
murmuring of waves breaking upon a shingly shore, and at times I
seemed to hear the whistling of wind.

I wondered whether I was awake, whether I was dreaming, whether my brain,
crazed by my fall, was not affected by imaginary noises. Yet neither
eyes, nor ears could be so utterly deceived.

It is a ray of daylight, I thought, sliding in through this cleft in
the rock! That is indeed the murmuring of waves! That is the rustling
noise of wind. Am I quite mistaken, or have we returned to the
surface of the earth? Has my uncle given up the expedition, or is it
happily terminated?

I was asking myself these unanswerable questions when the Professor
entered.

"Good morning, Axel," he cried cheerily. "I feel sure you are better."

"Yes, I am indeed," said I, sitting up on my couch.

"You can hardly fail to be better, for you have slept quietly. Hans
and I watched you by turns, and we have noticed you were evidently
recovering."

"Indeed, I do feel a great deal better, and I will give you a proof
of that presently if you will let me have my breakfast."

"You shall eat, lad. The fever has left you. Hans rubbed your wounds
with some ointment or other of which the Icelanders keep the secret,
and they have healed marvellously. Our hunter is a splendid fellow!"

Whilst he went on talking, my uncle prepared a few provisions, which
I devoured eagerly, notwithstanding his advice to the contrary. All
the while I was overwhelming him with questions which he answered
readily.

I then learnt that my providential fall had brought me exactly to the
extremity of an almost perpendicular shaft; and as I had landed in
the midst of an accompanying torrent of stones, the least of which
would have been enough to crush me, the conclusion was that a loose
portion of the rock had come down with me. This frightful conveyance
had thus carried me into the arms of my uncle, where I fell bruised,
bleeding, and insensible.

"Truly it is wonderful that you have not been killed a hundred times
over. But, for the love of God, don't let us ever separate again, or
we many never see each other more."

"Not separate! Is the journey not over, then?" I opened a pair of
astonished eyes, which immediately called for the question:

"What is the matter, Axel?"

"I have a question to ask you. You say that I am safe and sound?"

"No doubt you are."

"And all my limbs unbroken?"

"Certainly."

"And my head?"

"Your head, except for a few bruises, is all right; and it is on your
shoulders, where it ought to be."

"Well, I am afraid my brain is affected."

"Your mind affected!"

"Yes, I fear so. Are we again on the surface of the globe?"

"No, certainly not."

"Then I must be mad; for don't I see the light of day, and don't I
hear the wind blowing, and the sea breaking on the shore?"

"Ah! is that all?"

"Do tell me all about it."

"I can't explain the inexplicable, but you will soon see and
understand that geology has not yet learnt all it has to learn."

"Then let us go," I answered quickly.

"No, Axel; the open air might be bad for you."

"Open air?"

"Yes; the wind is rather strong. You must not expose yourself."

"But I assure you I am perfectly well."

"A little patience, my nephew. A relapse might get us into trouble,
and we have no time to lose, for the voyage may be a long one."

"The voyage!"

"Yes, rest to-day, and to-morrow we will set sail."

"Set sail!"--and I almost leaped up.

What did it all mean? Had we a river, a lake, a sea to depend upon?
Was there a ship at our disposal in some underground harbour?

My curiosity was highly excited, my uncle vainly tried to restrain
me. When he saw that my impatience was doing me harm, he yielded.

I dressed in haste. For greater safety I wrapped myself in a blanket,
and came out of the grotto.




CHAPTER XXX.

A NEW MARE INTERNUM


At first I could hardly see anything. My eyes, unaccustomed to the
light, quickly closed. When I was able to reopen them, I stood more
stupefied even than surprised.

"The sea!" I cried.

"Yes," my uncle replied, "the Liedenbrock Sea; and I don't suppose
any other discoverer will ever dispute my claim to name it after
myself as its first discoverer."

A vast sheet of water, the commencement of a lake or an ocean, spread
far away beyond the range of the eye, reminding me forcibly of that
open sea which drew from Xenophon's ten thousand Greeks, after their
long retreat, the simultaneous cry, "Thalatta! thalatta!" the sea!
the sea! The deeply indented shore was lined with a breadth of fine
shining sand, softly lapped by the waves, and strewn with the small
shells which had been inhabited by the first of created beings. The
waves broke on this shore with the hollow echoing murmur peculiar to
vast inclosed spaces. A light foam flew over the waves before the
breath of a moderate breeze, and some of the spray fell upon my face.
On this slightly inclining shore, about a hundred fathoms from the
limit of the waves, came down the foot of a huge wall of vast cliffs,
which rose majestically to an enormous height. Some of these,
dividing the beach with their sharp spurs, formed capes and
promontories, worn away by the ceaseless action of the surf. Farther
on the eye discerned their massive outline sharply defined against
the hazy distant horizon.

It was quite an ocean, with the irregular shores of earth, but desert
and frightfully wild in appearance.

If my eyes were able to range afar over this great sea, it was
because a peculiar light brought to view every detail of it. It was
not the light of the sun, with his dazzling shafts of brightness and
the splendour of his rays; nor was it the pale and uncertain shimmer
of the moonbeams, the dim reflection of a nobler body of light. No;
the illuminating power of this light, its trembling diffusiveness,
its bright, clear whiteness, and its low temperature, showed that it
must be of electric origin. It was like an aurora borealis, a
continuous cosmical phenomenon, filling a cavern of sufficient extent
to contain an ocean.

The vault that spanned the space above, the sky, if it could be
called so, seemed composed of vast plains of cloud, shifting and
variable vapours, which by their condensation must at certain times
fall in torrents of rain. I should have thought that under so
powerful a pressure of the atmosphere there could be no evaporation;
and yet, under a law unknown to me, there were broad tracts of vapour
suspended in the air. But then 'the weather was fine.' The play of
the electric light produced singular effects upon the upper strata of
cloud. Deep shadows reposed upon their lower wreaths; and often,
between two separated fields of cloud, there glided down a ray of
unspeakable lustre. But it was not solar light, and there was no
heat. The general effect was sad, supremely melancholy. Instead of
the shining firmament, spangled with its innumerable stars, shining
singly or in clusters, I felt that all these subdued and shaded
lights were ribbed in by vast walls of granite, which seemed to
overpower me with their weight, and that all this space, great as it
was, would not be enough for the march of the humblest of satellites.

Then I remembered the theory of an English captain, who likened the
earth to a vast hollow sphere, in the interior of which the air
became luminous because of the vast pressure that weighed upon it;
while two stars, Pluto and Proserpine, rolled within upon the circuit
of their mysterious orbits.

We were in reality shut up inside an immeasurable excavation. Its
width could not be estimated, since the shore ran widening as far as
eye could reach, nor could its length, for the dim horizon bounded
the new. As for its height, it must have been several leagues. Where
this vault rested upon its granite base no eye could tell; but there
was a cloud hanging far above, the height of which we estimated at
12,000 feet, a greater height than that of any terrestrial vapour,
and no doubt due to the great density of the air.

The word cavern does not convey any idea of this immense space; words
of human tongue are inadequate to describe the discoveries of him who
ventures into the deep abysses of earth.

Besides I could not tell upon what geological theory to account for
the existence of such an excavation. Had the cooling of the globe
produced it? I knew of celebrated caverns from the descriptions of
travellers, but had never heard of any of such dimensions as this.

If the grotto of Guachara, in Colombia, visited by Humboldt, had not
given up the whole of the secret of its depth to the philosopher, who
investigated it to the depth of 2,500 feet, it probably did not
extend much farther. The immense mammoth cave in Kentucky is of
gigantic proportions, since its vaulted roof rises five hundred feet
[1] above the level of an unfathomable lake and travellers have
explored its ramifications to the extent of forty miles. But what
were these cavities compared to that in which I stood with wonder and
admiration, with its sky of luminous vapours, its bursts of electric
light, and a vast sea filling its bed? My imagination fell powerless
before such immensity.

I gazed upon these wonders in silence. Words failed me to express my
feelings. I felt as if I was in some distant planet Uranus or
Neptune--and in the presence of phenomena of which my terrestrial
experience gave me no cognisance. For such novel sensations, new words
were wanted; and my imagination failed to supply them. I gazed, I
thought, I admired, with a stupefaction mingled with a certain amount of
fear.

The unforeseen nature of this spectacle brought back the colour to my
cheeks. I was under a new course of treatment with the aid of
astonishment, and my convalescence was promoted by this novel system
of therapeutics; besides, the dense and breezy air invigorated me,
supplying more oxygen to my lungs.

It will be easily conceived that after an imprisonment of forty seven
days in a narrow gallery it was the height of physical enjoyment to
breathe a moist air impregnated with saline particles.

[1] One hundred and twenty. (Trans.)

I was delighted to leave my dark grotto. My uncle, already familiar
with these wonders, had ceased to feel surprise.

"You feel strong enough to walk a little way now?" he asked.

"Yes, certainly; and nothing could be more delightful."

"Well, take my arm, Axel, and let us follow the windings of the
shore."

I eagerly accepted, and we began to coast along this new sea. On the
left huge pyramids of rock, piled one upon another, produced a
prodigious titanic effect. Down their sides flowed numberless
waterfalls, which went on their way in brawling but pellucid streams.
A few light vapours, leaping from rock to rock, denoted the place of
hot springs; and streams flowed softly down to the common basin,
gliding down the gentle slopes with a softer murmur.

Amongst these streams I recognised our faithful travelling companion,
the Hansbach, coming to lose its little volume quietly in the mighty
sea, just as if it had done nothing else since the beginning of the
world.

"We shall see it no more," I said, with a sigh.

"What matters," replied the philosopher, "whether this or another
serves to guide us?"

I thought him rather ungrateful.

But at that moment my attention was drawn to an unexpected sight. At
a distance of five hundred paces, at the turn of a high promontory,
appeared a high, tufted, dense forest. It was composed of trees of
moderate height, formed like umbrellas, with exact geometrical
outlines. The currents of wind seemed to have had no effect upon
their shape, and in the midst of the windy blasts they stood unmoved
and firm, just like a clump of petrified cedars.

I hastened forward. I could not give any name to these singular
creations. Were they some of the two hundred thousand species of
vegetables known hitherto, and did they claim a place of their own in
the lacustrine flora? No; when we arrived under their shade my
surprise turned into admiration. There stood before me productions of
earth, but of gigantic stature, which my uncle immediately named.

"It is only a forest of mushrooms," said he.

And he was right. Imagine the large development attained by these
plants, which prefer a warm, moist climate. I knew that the
_Lycopodon giganteum_ attains, according to Bulliard, a circumference
of eight or nine feet; but here were pale mushrooms, thirty to forty
feet high, and crowned with a cap of equal diameter. There they stood
in thousands. No light could penetrate between their huge cones, and
complete darkness reigned beneath those giants; they formed
settlements of domes placed in close array like the round, thatched
roofs of a central African city.

Yet I wanted to penetrate farther underneath, though a chill fell
upon me as soon as I came under those cellular vaults. For half an
hour we wandered from side to side in the damp shades, and it was a
comfortable and pleasant change to arrive once more upon the sea
shore.

But the subterranean vegetation was not confined to these fungi.
Farther on rose groups of tall trees of colourless foliage and easy
to recognise. They were lowly shrubs of earth, here attaining
gigantic size; lycopodiums, a hundred feet high; the huge sigillaria,
found in our coal mines; tree ferns, as tall as our fir-trees in
northern latitudes; lepidodendra, with cylindrical forked stems,
terminated by long leaves, and bristling with rough hairs like those
of the cactus.

"Wonderful, magnificent, splendid!" cried my uncle. "Here is the
entire flora of the second period of the world--the transition
period. These, humble garden plants with us, were tall trees in the
early ages. Look, Axel, and admire it all. Never had botanist such a
feast as this!"

"You are right, my uncle. Providence seems to have preserved in this
immense conservatory the antediluvian plants which the wisdom of
philosophers has so sagaciously put together again."

"It is a conservatory, Axel; but is it not also a menagerie?"

"Surely not a menagerie!"

"Yes; no doubt of it. Look at that dust under your feet; see the
bones scattered on the ground."

"So there are!" I cried; "bones of extinct animals."

I had rushed upon these remains, formed of indestructible phosphates
of lime, and without hesitation I named these monstrous bones, which
lay scattered about like decayed trunks of trees.

"Here is the lower jaw of a mastodon," [1] I said. "These are the
molar teeth of the deinotherium; this femur must have belonged to the
greatest of those beasts, the megatherium. It certainly is a
menagerie, for these remains were not brought here by a deluge. The
animals to which they belonged roamed on the shores of this
subterranean sea, under the shade of those arborescent trees. Here
are entire skeletons. And yet I cannot understand the appearance of
these quadrupeds in a granite cavern."

[1] These animals belonged to a late geological period, the Pliocene,
just before the glacial epoch, and therefore could have no connection
with the carboniferous vegetation. (Trans.)

"Why?"

"Because animal life existed upon the earth only in the secondary
period, when a sediment of soil had been deposited by the rivers, and
taken the place of the incandescent rocks of the primitive period."

"Well, Axel, there is a very simple answer to your objection that
this soil is alluvial."

"What! at such a depth below the surface of the earth?"

"No doubt; and there is a geological explanation of the fact. At a
certain period the earth consisted only of an elastic crust or bark,
alternately acted on by forces from above or below, according to the
laws of attraction and gravitation. Probably there were subsidences
of the outer crust, when a portion of the sedimentary deposits was
carried down sudden openings."

"That may be," I replied; "but if there have been creatures now
extinct in these underground regions, why may not some of those
monsters be now roaming through these gloomy forests, or hidden
behind the steep crags?"

And as this unpleasant notion got hold of me, I surveyed with anxious
scrutiny the open spaces before me; but no living creature appeared
upon the barren strand.

I felt rather tired, and went to sit down at the end of a promontory,
at the foot of which the waves came and beat themselves into spray.
Thence my eye could sweep every part of the bay; within its extremity
a little harbour was formed between the pyramidal cliffs, where the
still waters slept untouched by the boisterous winds. A brig and two
or three schooners might have moored within it in safety. I almost
fancied I should presently see some ship issue from it, full sail,
and take to the open sea under the southern breeze.

But this illusion lasted a very short time. We were the only living
creatures in this subterranean world. When the wind lulled, a deeper
silence than that of the deserts fell upon the arid, naked rocks, and
weighed upon the surface of the ocean. I then desired to pierce the
distant haze, and to rend asunder the mysterious curtain that hung
across the horizon. Anxious queries arose to my lips. Where did that
sea terminate? Where did it lead to? Should we ever know anything
about its opposite shores?

My uncle made no doubt about it at all; I both desired and feared.

After spending an hour in the contemplation of this marvellous
spectacle, we returned to the shore to regain the grotto, and I fell
asleep in the midst of the strangest thoughts.




CHAPTER XXXI.

PREPARATIONS FOR A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY


The next morning I awoke feeling perfectly well. I thought a bathe
would do me good, and I went to plunge for a few minutes into the
waters of this mediterranean sea, for assuredly it better deserved
this name than any other sea.

I came back to breakfast with a good appetite. Hans was a good
caterer for our little household; he had water and fire at his
disposal, so that he was able to vary our bill of fare now and then.
For dessert he gave us a few cups of coffee, and never was coffee so
delicious.

"Now," said my uncle, "now is the time for high tide, and we must not
lose the opportunity to study this phenomenon."

"What! the tide!" I cried. "Can the influence of the sun and moon be
felt down here?"

"Why not? Are not all bodies subject throughout their mass to the
power of universal attraction? This mass of water cannot escape the
general law. And in spite of the heavy atmospheric pressure on the
surface, you will see it rise like the Atlantic itself."

At the same moment we reached the sand on the shore, and the waves
were by slow degrees encroaching on the shore.

"Here is the tide rising," I cried.

"Yes, Axel; and judging by these ridges of foam, you may observe that
the sea will rise about twelve feet."

"This is wonderful," I said.

"No; it is quite natural."

"You may say so, uncle; but to me it is most extraordinary, and I can
hardly believe my eyes. Who would ever have imagined, under this
terrestrial crust, an ocean with ebbing and flowing tides, with winds
and storms?"

"Well," replied my uncle, "is there any scientific reason against it?"

"No; I see none, as soon as the theory of central heat is given up."
"So then, thus far," he answered, "the theory of Sir Humphry Davy is
confirmed."

"Evidently it is; and now there is no reason why there should not be
seas and continents in the interior of the earth."

"No doubt," said my uncle; "and inhabited too."

"To be sure," said I; "and why should not these waters yield to us
fishes of unknown species?"

"At any rate," he replied, "we have not seen any yet."

"Well, let us make some lines, and see if the bait will draw here as
it does in sublunary regions."

"We will try, Axel, for we must penetrate all secrets of these newly
discovered regions."

"But where are we, uncle? for I have not yet asked you that question,
and your instruments must be able to furnish the answer."

"Horizontally, three hundred and fifty leagues from Iceland."

"So much as that?"

"I am sure of not being a mile out of my reckoning."

"And does the compass still show south-east?"

"Yes; with a westerly deviation of nineteen degrees forty-five
minutes, just as above ground. As for its dip, a curious fact is
coming to light, which I have observed carefully: that the needle,
instead of dipping towards the pole as in the northern hemisphere, on
the contrary, rises from it."

"Would you then conclude," I said, "that the magnetic pole is
somewhere between the surface of the globe and the point where we
are?"

"Exactly so; and it is likely enough that if we were to reach the
spot beneath the polar regions, about that seventy-first degree where
Sir James Ross has discovered the magnetic pole to be situated, we
should see the needle point straight up. Therefore that mysterious
centre of attraction is at no great depth."

I remarked: "It is so; and here is a fact which science has scarcely
suspected."

"Science, my lad, has been built upon many errors; but they are
errors which it was good to fall into, for they led to the truth."

"What depth have we now reached?"

"We are thirty-five leagues below the surface."

"So," I said, examining the map, "the Highlands of Scotland are over
our heads, and the Grampians are raising their rugged summits above
us."

"Yes," answered the Professor laughing. "It is rather a heavy weight
to bear, but a solid arch spans over our heads. The great Architect
has built it of the best materials; and never could man have given it
so wide a stretch. What are the finest arches of bridges and the
arcades of cathedrals, compared with this far reaching vault, with a
radius of three leagues, beneath which a wide and tempest-tossed
ocean may flow at its ease?"

"Oh, I am not afraid that it will fall down upon my head. But now
what are your plans? Are you not thinking of returning to the surface
now?"

"Return! no, indeed! We will continue our journey, everything having
gone on well so far."

"But how are we to get down below this liquid surface?"

"Oh, I am not going to dive head foremost. But if all oceans are
properly speaking but lakes, since they are encompassed by land, of
course this internal sea will be surrounded by a coast of granite,
and on the opposite shores we shall find fresh passages opening."

"How long do you suppose this sea to be?"

"Thirty or forty leagues; so that we have no time to lose, and we
shall set sail to-morrow."

I looked about for a ship.

"Set sail, shall we? But I should like to see my boat first."

"It will not be a boat at all, but a good, well-made raft."

"Why," I said, "a raft would be just as hard to make as a boat, and I
don't see--"

"I know you don't see; but you might hear if you would listen. Don't
you hear the hammer at work? Hans is already busy at it."

"What, has he already felled the trees?"

"Oh, the trees were already down. Come, and you will see for
yourself."

After half an hour's walking, on the other side of the promontory
which formed the little natural harbour, I perceived Hans at work. In
a few more steps I was at his side. To my great surprise a
half-finished raft was already lying on the sand, made of a peculiar
kind of wood, and a great number of planks, straight and bent, and of
frames, were covering the ground, enough almost for a little fleet.

"Uncle, what wood is this?" I cried.

"It is fir, pine, or birch, and other northern coniferae, mineralised
by the action of the sea. It is called surturbrand, a variety of
brown coal or lignite, found chiefly in Iceland."

"But surely, then, like other fossil wood, it must be as hard as
stone, and cannot float?"

"Sometimes that may happen; some of these woods become true
anthracites; but others, such as this, have only gone through the
first stage of fossil transformation. Just look," added my uncle,
throwing into the sea one of those precious waifs.

The bit of wood, after disappearing, returned to the surface and
oscillated to and fro with the waves.

"Are you convinced?" said my uncle.

"I am quite convinced, although it is incredible!"

By next evening, thanks to the industry and skill of our guide, the
raft was made. It was ten feet by five; the planks of surturbrand,
braced strongly together with cords, presented an even surface, and
when launched this improvised vessel floated easily upon the waves of
the Liedenbrock Sea.




CHAPTER XXXII.

WONDERS OF THE DEEP


On the 13th of August we awoke early. We were now to begin to adopt a
mode of travelling both more expeditious and less fatiguing than
hitherto.

A mast was made of two poles spliced together, a yard was made of a
third, a blanket borrowed from our coverings made a tolerable sail.
There was no want of cordage for the rigging, and everything was well
and firmly made.

The provisions, the baggage, the instruments, the guns, and a good
quantity of fresh water from the rocks around, all found their proper
places on board; and at six the Professor gave the signal to embark.
Hans had fitted up a rudder to steer his vessel. He took the tiller,
and unmoored; the sail was set, and we were soon afloat. At the
moment of leaving the harbour, my uncle, who was tenaciously fond of
naming his new discoveries, wanted to give it a name, and proposed
mine amongst others.

"But I have a better to propose," I said: "Grauben. Let it be called
Port Gruben; it will look very well upon the map."

"Port Gruben let it be then."

And so the cherished remembrance of my Virlandaise became associated
with our adventurous expedition.

The wind was from the north-west. We went with it at a high rate of
speed. The dense atmosphere acted with great force and impelled us
swiftly on.

In an hour my uncle had been able to estimate our progress. At this
rate, he said, we shall make thirty leagues in twenty-four hours, and
we shall soon come in sight of the opposite shore.

I made no answer, but went and sat forward. The northern shore was
already beginning to dip under the horizon. The eastern and western
strands spread wide as if to bid us farewell. Before our eyes lay far
and wide a vast sea; shadows of great clouds swept heavily over its
silver-grey surface; the glistening bluish rays of electric light,
here and there reflected by the dancing drops of spray, shot out
little sheaves of light from the track we left in our rear. Soon we
entirely lost sight of land; no object was left for the eye to judge
by, and but for the frothy track of the raft, I might have thought we
were standing still.

About twelve, immense shoals of seaweeds came in sight. I was aware
of the great powers of vegetation that characterise these plants,
which grow at a depth of twelve thousand feet, reproduce themselves
under a pressure of four hundred atmospheres, and sometimes form
barriers strong enough to impede the course of a ship. But never, I
think, were such seaweeds as those which we saw floating in immense
waving lines upon the sea of Liedenbrock.

Our raft skirted the whole length of the fuci, three or four thousand
feet long, undulating like vast serpents beyond the reach of sight; I
found some amusement in tracing these endless waves, always thinking
I should come to the end of them, and for hours my patience was vying
with my surprise.

What natural force could have produced such plants, and what must
have been the appearance of the earth in the first ages of its
formation, when, under the action of heat and moisture, the vegetable
kingdom alone was developing on its surface?

Evening came, and, as on the previous day, I perceived no change in
the luminous condition of the air. It was a constant condition, the
permanency of which might be relied upon.

After supper I laid myself down at the foot of the mast, and fell
asleep in the midst of fantastic reveries.

Hans, keeping fast by the helm, let the raft run on, which, after
all, needed no steering, the wind blowing directly aft.

Since our departure from Port Gruben, Professor Liedenbrock had
entrusted the log to my care; I was to register every observation,
make entries of interesting phenomena, the direction of the wind, the
rate of sailing, the way we made--in a word, every particular of our
singular voyage.

I shall therefore reproduce here these daily notes, written, so to
speak, as the course of events directed, in order to furnish an exact
narrative of our passage.

_Friday, August 14_.--Wind steady, N.W. The raft makes rapid way in
a direct line. Coast thirty leagues to leeward. Nothing in sight
before us. Intensity of light the same. Weather fine; that is to say,
that the clouds are flying high, are light, and bathed in a white
atmosphere resembling silver in a state of fusion. Therm. 89 Fahr.

At noon Hans prepared a hook at the end of a line. He baited it with
a small piece of meat and flung it into the sea. For two hours
nothing was caught. Are these waters, then, bare of inhabitants? No,
there's a pull at the line. Hans draws it in and brings out a
struggling fish.

"A sturgeon," I cried; "a small sturgeon."

The Professor eyes the creature attentively, and his opinion differs
from mine.

The head of this fish was flat, but rounded in front, and the
anterior part of its body was plated with bony, angular scales; it
had no teeth, its pectoral fins were large, and of tail there was
none. The animal belonged to the same order as the sturgeon, but
differed from that fish in many essential particulars. After a short
examination my uncle pronounced his opinion.

"This fish belongs to an extinct family, of which only fossil traces
are found in the devonian formations."

"What!" I cried. "Have we taken alive an inhabitant of the seas of
primitive ages?"

"Yes; and you will observe that these fossil fishes have no identity
with any living species. To have in one's possession a living
specimen is a happy event for a naturalist."

"But to what family does it belong?"

"It is of the order of ganoids, of the family of the cephalaspidae;
and a species of pterichthys. But this one displays a peculiarity
confined to all fishes that inhabit subterranean waters. It is blind,
and not only blind, but actually has no eyes at all."

I looked: nothing could be more certain. But supposing it might be a
solitary case, we baited afresh, and threw out our line. Surely this
ocean is well peopled with fish, for in another couple of hours we
took a large quantity of pterichthydes, as well as of others
belonging to the extinct family of the dipterides, but of which my
uncle could not tell the species; none had organs of sight. This
unhoped-for catch recruited our stock of provisions.

Thus it is evident that this sea contains none but species known to
us in their fossil state, in which fishes as well as reptiles are the
less perfectly and completely organised the farther back their date
of creation.

Perhaps we may yet meet with some of those saurians which science has
reconstructed out of a bit of bone or cartilage. I took up the
telescope and scanned the whole horizon, and found it everywhere a
desert sea. We are far away removed from the shores.

I gaze upward in the air. Why should not some of the strange birds
restored by the immortal Cuvier again flap their 'sail-broad vans' in
this dense and heavy atmosphere? There are sufficient fish for their
support. I survey the whole space that stretches overhead; it is as
desert as the shore was.

Still my imagination carried me away amongst the wonderful
speculations of palontology. Though awake I fell into a dream. I
thought I could see floating on the surface of the waters enormous
chelonia, pre-adamite tortoises, resembling floating islands. Over the
dimly lighted strand there trod the huge mammals of the first ages of
the world, the leptotherium (slender beast), found in the caverns of
Brazil; the merycotherium (ruminating beast), found in the 'drift' of
iceclad Siberia. Farther on, the pachydermatous lophiodon (crested
toothed), a gigantic tapir, hides behind the rocks to dispute its
prey with the anoplotherium (unarmed beast), a strange creature,
which seemed a compound of horse, rhinoceros, camel, and
hippopotamus. The colossal mastodon (nipple-toothed) twists and
untwists his trunk, and brays and pounds with his huge tusks the
fragments of rock that cover the shore; whilst the megatherium (huge
beast), buttressed upon his enormous hinder paws, grubs in the soil,
awaking the sonorous echoes of the granite rocks with his tremendous
roarings. Higher up, the protopitheca--the first monkey that
appeared on the globe--is climbing up the steep ascents. Higher yet,
the pterodactyle (wing-fingered) darts in irregular zigzags to and
fro in the heavy air. In the uppermost regions of the air immense
birds, more powerful than the cassowary, and larger than the ostrich,
spread their vast breadth of wings and strike with their heads the
granite vault that bounds the sky.

All this fossil world rises to life again in my vivid imagination. I
return to the scriptural periods or ages of the world, conventionally
called 'days,' long before the appearance of man, when the unfinished
world was as yet unfitted for his support. Then my dream backed even
farther still into the ages before the creation of living beings. The
mammals disappear, then the birds vanish, then the reptiles of the
secondary period, and finally the fish, the crustaceans, molluscs,
and articulated beings. Then the zoophytes of the transition period
also return to nothing. I am the only living thing in the world: all
life is concentrated in my beating heart alone. There are no more
seasons; climates are no more; the heat of the globe continually
increases and neutralises that of the sun. Vegetation becomes
accelerated. I glide like a shade amongst arborescent ferns, treading
with unsteady feet the coloured marls and the particoloured clays; I
lean for support against the trunks of immense conifers; I lie in the
shade of sphenophylla (wedge-leaved), asterophylla (star-leaved), and
lycopods, a hundred feet high.

Ages seem no more than days! I am passed, against my will, in
retrograde order, through the long series of terrestrial changes.
Plants disappear; granite rocks soften; intense heat converts solid
bodies into thick fluids; the waters again cover the face of the
earth; they boil, they rise in whirling eddies of steam; white and
ghastly mists wrap round the shifting forms of the earth, which by
imperceptible degrees dissolves into a gaseous mass, glowing fiery
red and white, as large and as shining as the sun.

And I myself am floating with wild caprice in the midst of this
nebulous mass of fourteen hundred thousand times the volume of the
earth into which it will one day be condensed, and carried forward
amongst the planetary bodies. My body is no longer firm and
terrestrial; it is resolved into its constituent atoms, subtilised,
volatilised. Sublimed into imponderable vapour, I mingle and am lost
in the endless foods of those vast globular volumes of vaporous
mists, which roll upon their flaming orbits through infinite space.

But is it not a dream? Whither is it carrying me? My feverish hand
has vainly attempted to describe upon paper its strange and wonderful
details. I have forgotten everything that surrounds me. The
Professor, the guide, the raft--are all gone out of my ken. An
illusion has laid hold upon me.

"What is the matter?" my uncle breaks in.

My staring eyes are fixed vacantly upon him.

"Take care, Axel, or you will fall overboard."

At that moment I felt the sinewy hand of Hans seizing me vigorously.
But for him, carried away by my dream, I should have thrown myself
into the sea.

"Is he mad?" cried the Professor.

"What is it all about?" at last I cried, returning to myself.

"Do you feel ill?" my uncle asked.

"No; but I have had a strange hallucination; it is over now. Is all
going on right?"

"Yes, it is a fair wind and a fine sea; we are sailing rapidly along,
and if I am not out in my reckoning, we shall soon land."

At these words I rose and gazed round upon the horizon, still
everywhere bounded by clouds alone.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

A BATTLE OF MONSTERS


_Saturday, August 15_.--The sea unbroken all round. No land in
sight. The horizon seems extremely distant.

My head is still stupefied with the vivid reality of my dream.

My uncle has had no dreams, but he is out of temper. He examines the
horizon all round with his glass, and folds his arms with the air of
an injured man.

I remark that Professor Liedenbrock has a tendency to relapse into an
impatient mood, and I make a note of it in my log. All my danger and
sufferings were needed to strike a spark of human feeling out of
him; but now that I am well his nature has resumed its sway. And yet,
what cause was there for anger? Is not the voyage prospering as
favourably as possible under the circumstances? Is not the raft
spinning along with marvellous speed?

"-You seem anxious, my uncle," I said, seeing him continually with
his glass to his eye.

"Anxious! No, not at all."

"Impatient, then?"

"One might be, with less reason than now."

"Yet we are going very fast."

"What does that signify? I am not complaining that the rate is slow,
but that the sea is so wide."

I then remembered that the Professor, before starting, had estimated
the length of this underground sea at thirty leagues. Now we had made
three times the distance, yet still the southern coast was not in
sight.

"We are not descending as we ought to be," the Professor declares.
"We are losing time, and the fact is, I have not come all this way to
take a little sail upon a pond on a raft."

He called this sea a pond, and our long voyage, taking a little sail!

"But," I remarked, "since we have followed the road that Saknussemm
has shown us--"

"That is just the question. Have we followed that road? Did
Saknussemm meet this sheet of water? Did he cross it? Has not the
stream that we followed led us altogether astray?"

"At any rate we cannot feel sorry to have come so far. This prospect
is magnificent, and--"

"But I don't care for prospects. I came with an object, and I mean to
attain it. Therefore don't talk to me about views and prospects."

I take this as my answer, and I leave the Professor to bite his lips
with impatience. At six in the evening Hans asks for his wages, and
his three rix dollars are counted out to him.

_Sunday, August 16. _--Nothing new. Weather unchanged. The wind
freshens. On awaking, my first thought was to observe the intensity
of the light. I was possessed with an apprehension lest the electric
light should grow dim, or fail altogether. But there seemed no reason
to fear. The shadow of the raft was clearly outlined upon the surface
of the waves.

Truly this sea is of infinite width. It must be as wide as the
Mediterranean or the Atlantic--and why not?

My uncle took soundings several times. He tied the heaviest of our
pickaxes to a long rope which he let down two hundred fathoms. No
bottom yet; and we had some difficulty in hauling up our plummet.

But when the pick was shipped again, Hans pointed out on its surface
deep prints as if it had been violently compressed between two hard
bodies.

I looked at the hunter.

"_Tnder,_" said he.

I could not understand him, and turned to my uncle who was entirely
absorbed in his calculations. I had rather not disturb him while he
is quiet. I return to the Icelander. He by a snapping motion of his
jaws conveys his ideas to me.

"Teeth!" I cried, considering the iron bar with more attention.

Yes, indeed, those are the marks of teeth imprinted upon the metal!
The jaws which they arm must be possessed of amazing strength. Is
there some monster beneath us belonging to the extinct races, more
voracious than the shark, more fearful in vastness than the whale? I
could not take my eyes off this indented iron bar. Surely will my
last night's dream be realised?

These thoughts agitated me all day, and my imagination scarcely
calmed down after several hours' sleep.

_Monday, August 17.--_ I am trying to recall the peculiar instincts
of the monsters of the pre-adamite world, who, coming next in
succession after the molluscs, the crustaceans and le fishes,
preceded the animals of mammalian race upon the earth. The world then
belonged to reptiles. Those monsters held the mastery in the seas of
the secondary period. They possessed a perfect organisation, gigantic
proportions, prodigious strength. The saurians of our day, the
alligators and the crocodiles, are but feeble reproductions of their
forefathers of primitive ages.

I shudder as I recall these monsters to my remembrance. No human eye
has ever beheld them living. They burdened this earth a thousand ages
before man appeared, but their fossil remains, found in the
argillaceous limestone called by the English the lias, have enabled
their colossal structure to be perfectly built up again and
anatomically ascertained.

I saw at the Hamburg museum the skeleton of one of these creatures
thirty feet in length. Am I then fated--I, a denizen of earth--to
be placed face to face with these representatives of long extinct
families? No; surely it cannot be! Yet the deep marks of conical
teeth upon the iron pick are certainly those of the crocodile.

My eyes are fearfully bent upon the sea. I dread to see one of these
monsters darting forth from its submarine caverns. I suppose
Professor Liedenbrock was of my opinion too, and even shared my
fears, for after having examined the pick, his eyes traversed the
ocean from side to side. What a very bad notion that was of his, I
thought to myself, to take soundings just here! He has disturbed some
monstrous beast in its remote den, and if we are not attacked on our
voyage--

I look at our guns and see that they are all right. My uncle notices
it, and looks on approvingly.

Already widely disturbed regions on the surface of the water indicate
some commotion below. The danger is approaching. We must be on the
look out.

_Tuesday, August 18. _--Evening came, or rather the time came when
sleep weighs down the weary eyelids, for there is no night here, and
the ceaseless light wearies the eyes with its persistency just as if
we were sailing under an arctic sun. Hans was at the helm. During his
watch I slept.

Two hours afterwards a terrible shock awoke me. The raft was heaved
up on a watery mountain and pitched down again, at a distance of
twenty fathoms.

"What is the matter?" shouted my uncle. "Have we struck land?"

Hans pointed with his finger at a dark mass six hundred yards away,
rising and falling alternately with heavy plunges. I looked and cried:

"It is an enormous porpoise."

"Yes," replied my uncle, "and there is a sea lizard of vast size."

"And farther on a monstrous crocodile. Look at its vast jaws and its
rows of teeth! It is diving down!"

"There's a whale, a whale!" cried the Professor. "I can see its great
fins. See how he is throwing out air and water through his blowers."

And in fact two liquid columns were rising to a considerable height
above the sea. We stood amazed, thunderstruck, at the presence of
such a herd of marine monsters. They were of supernatural dimensions;
the smallest of them would have crunched our raft, crew and all, at
one snap of its huge jaws.

Hans wants to tack to get away from this dangerous neighbourhood; but
he sees on the other hand enemies not less terrible; a tortoise forty
feet long, and a serpent of thirty, lifting its fearful head and
gleaming eyes above the flood.

Flight was out of the question now. The reptiles rose; they wheeled
around our little raft with a rapidity greater than that of express
trains. They described around us gradually narrowing circles. I took
up my rifle. But what could a ball do against the scaly armour with
which these enormous beasts were clad?

We stood dumb with fear. They approach us close: on one side the
crocodile, on the other the serpent. The remainder of the sea
monsters have disappeared. I prepare to fire. Hans stops me by a
gesture. The two monsters pass within a hundred and fifty yards of
the raft, and hurl themselves the one upon the other, with a fury
which prevents them from seeing us.

At three hundred yards from us the battle was fought. We could
distinctly observe the two monsters engaged in deadly conflict. But
it now seems to me as if the other animals were taking part in the
fray--the porpoise, the whale, the lizard, the tortoise. Every
moment I seem to see one or other of them. I point them to the
Icelander. He shakes his head negatively.

"_Tva,_" says he.

"What two? Does he mean that there are only two animals?"

"He is right," said my uncle, whose glass has never left his eye.

"Surely you must be mistaken," I cried.

"No: the first of those monsters has a porpoise's snout, a lizard's
head, a crocodile's teeth; and hence our mistake. It is the
ichthyosaurus (the fish lizard), the most terrible of the ancient
monsters of the deep."

"And the other?"

"The other is a plesiosaurus (almost lizard), a serpent, armoured
with the carapace and the paddles of a turtle; he is the dreadful
enemy of the other."

Hans had spoken truly. Two monsters only were creating all this
commotion; and before my eyes are two reptiles of the primitive
world. I can distinguish the eye of the ichthyosaurus glowing like a
red-hot coal, and as large as a man's head. Nature has endowed it
with an optical apparatus of extreme power, and capable of resisting
the pressure of the great volume of water in the depths it inhabits.
It has been appropriately called the saurian whale, for it has both
the swiftness and the rapid movements of this monster of our own day.
This one is not less than a hundred feet long, and I can judge of its
size when it sweeps over the waters the vertical coils of its tail.
Its jaw is enormous, and according to naturalists it is armed with no
less than one hundred and eighty-two teeth.

The plesiosaurus, a serpent with a cylindrical body and a short tail,
has four flappers or paddles to act like oars. Its body is entirely
covered with a thick armour of scales, and its neck, as flexible as a
swan's, rises thirty feet above the waves.

Those huge creatures attacked each other with the greatest animosity.
They heaved around them liquid mountains, which rolled even to our
raft and rocked it perilously. Twenty times we were near capsizing.
Hissings of prodigious force are heard. The two beasts are fast
locked together; I cannot distinguish the one from the other. The
probable rage of the conqueror inspires us with intense fear.

One hour, two hours, pass away. The struggle continues with unabated
ferocity. The combatants alternately approach and recede from our
raft. We remain motionless, ready to fire. Suddenly the ichthyosaurus
and the plesiosaurus disappear below, leaving a whirlpool eddying in
the water. Several minutes pass by while the fight goes on under
water.

All at once an enormous head is darted up, the head of the
plesiosaurus. The monster is wounded to death. I no longer see his
scaly armour. Only his long neck shoots up, drops again, coils and
uncoils, droops, lashes the waters like a gigantic whip, and writhes
like a worm that you tread on. The water is splashed for a long way
around. The spray almost blinds us. But soon the reptile's agony
draws to an end; its movements become fainter, its contortions cease
to be so violent, and the long serpentine form lies a lifeless log on
the labouring deep.

As for the ichthyosaurus--has he returned to his submarine cavern?
or will he reappear on the surface of the sea?




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE GREAT GEYSER


_Wednesday, August 19_.--Fortunately the wind blows violently, and
has enabled us to flee from the scene of the late terrible struggle.
Hans keeps at his post at the helm. My uncle, whom the absorbing
incidents of the combat had drawn away from his contemplations, began
again to look impatiently around him.

The voyage resumes its uniform tenor, which I don't care to break
with a repetition of such events as yesterday's.

Thursday, Aug. 20.--Wind N.N.E., unsteady and fitful. Temperature
high. Rate three and a half leagues an hour.

About noon a distant noise is heard. I note the fact without being
able to explain it. It is a continuous roar.

"In the distance," says the Professor, "there is a rock or islet,
against which the sea is breaking."

Hans climbs up the mast, but sees no breakers. The ocean' is smooth
and unbroken to its farthest limit.

Three hours pass away. The roarings seem to proceed from a very
distant waterfall.

I remark upon this to my uncle, who replies doubtfully: "Yes, I am
convinced that I am right." Are we, then, speeding forward to some
cataract which will cast us down an abyss? This method of getting on
may please the Professor, because it is vertical; but for my part I
prefer the more ordinary modes of horizontal progression.

At any rate, some leagues to the windward there must be some noisy
phenomenon, for now the roarings are heard with increasing loudness.
Do they proceed from the sky or the ocean?

I look up to the atmospheric vapours, and try to fathom their depths.
The sky is calm and motionless. The clouds have reached the utmost
limit of the lofty vault, and there lie still bathed in the bright
glare of the electric light. It is not there that we must seek for
the cause of this phenomenon. Then I examine the horizon, which is
unbroken and clear of all mist. There is no change in its aspect. But
if this noise arises from a fall, a cataract, if all this ocean flows
away headlong into a lower basin yet, if that deafening roar is
produced by a mass of falling water, the current must needs
accelerate, and its increasing speed will give me the measure of the
peril that threatens us. I consult the current: there is none. I
throw an empty bottle into the sea: it lies still.

About four Hans rises, lays hold of the mast, climbs to its top.
Thence his eye sweeps a large area of sea, and it is fixed upon a
point. His countenance exhibits no surprise, but his eye is immovably
steady.

"He sees something," says my uncle.

"I believe he does."

Hans comes down, then stretches his arm to the south, saying:

"_Dere nere!_"

"Down there?" repeated my uncle.

Then, seizing his glass, he gazes attentively for a minute, which
seems to me an age.

"Yes, yes!" he cried. "I see a vast inverted cone rising from the
surface."

"Is it another sea beast?"

"Perhaps it is."

"Then let us steer farther westward, for we know something of the
danger of coming across monsters of that sort."

"Let us go straight on," replied my uncle.

I appealed to Hans. He maintained his course inflexibly.

Yet, if at our present distance from the animal, a distance of twelve
leagues at the least, the column of water driven through its blowers
may be distinctly seen, it must needs be of vast size. The commonest
prudence would counsel immediate flight; but we did not come so far
to be prudent.

Imprudently, therefore, we pursue our way. The nearer we approach,
the higher mounts the jet of water. What monster can possibly fill
itself with such a quantity of water, and spurt it up so continuously?

At eight in the evening we are not two leagues distant from it. Its
body--dusky, enormous, hillocky--lies spread upon the sea like an
islet. Is it illusion or fear? Its length seems to me a couple of
thousand yards. What can be this cetacean, which neither Cuvier nor
Blumenbach knew anything about? It lies motionless, as if asleep; the
sea seems unable to move it in the least; it is the waves that
undulate upon its sides. The column of water thrown up to a height of
five hundred feet falls in rain with a deafening uproar. And here are
we scudding like lunatics before the wind, to get near to a monster
that a hundred whales a day would not satisfy!

Terror seizes upon me. I refuse to go further. I will cut the
halliards if necessary! I am in open mutiny against the Professor,
who vouchsafes no answer.

Suddenly Hans rises, and pointing with his finger at the menacing
object, he says:

"_Holm._"

"An island!" cries my uncle.

"That's not an island!" I cried sceptically.

"It's nothing else," shouted the Professor, with a loud laugh.

"But that column of water?"

"_Geyser,_" said Hans.

"No doubt it is a geyser, like those in Iceland."

At first I protest against being so widely mistaken as to have taken
an island for a marine monster. But the evidence is against me, and I
have to confess my error. It is nothing worse than a natural
phenomenon.

As we approach nearer the dimensions of the liquid column become
magnificent. The islet resembles, with a most deceiving likeness, an
enormous cetacean, whose head dominates the waves at a height of
twenty yards. The geyser, a word meaning 'fury,' rises majestically
from its extremity. Deep and heavy explosions are heard from time to
time, when the enormous jet, possessed with more furious violence,
shakes its plumy crest, and springs with a bound till it reaches the
lowest stratum of the clouds. It stands alone. No steam vents, no hot
springs surround it, and all the volcanic power of the region is
concentrated here. Sparks of electric fire mingle with the dazzling
sheaf of lighted fluid, every drop of which refracts the prismatic
colours.

"Let us land," said the Professor.

"But we must carefully avoid this waterspout, which would sink our
raft in a moment."

Hans, steering with his usual skill, brought us to the other
extremity of the islet.

I leaped up on the rock; my uncle lightly followed, while our hunter
remained at his post, like a man too wise ever to be astonished.

We walked upon granite mingled with siliceous tufa. The soil shivers
and shakes under our feet, like the sides of an overheated boiler
filled with steam struggling to get loose. We come in sight of a
small central basin, out of which the geyser springs. I plunge a
register thermometer into the boiling water. It marks an intense heat
of 325, which is far above the boiling point; therefore this water
issues from an ardent furnace, which is not at all in harmony with
Professor Liedenbrock's theories. I cannot help making the remark.

"Well," he replied, "how does that make against my doctrine?"

"Oh, nothing at all," I said, seeing that I was going in opposition
to immovable obstinacy.

Still I am constrained to confess that hitherto we have been
wonderfully favoured, and that for some reason unknown to myself we
have accomplished our journey under singularly favourable conditions
of temperature. But it seems manifest to me that some day we shall
reach a region where the central heat attains its highest limits, and
goes beyond a point that can be registered by our thermometers.

"That is what we shall see." So says the Professor, who, having named
this volcanic islet after his nephew, gives the signal to embark
again.

For some minutes I am still contemplating the geyser. I notice that
it throws up its column of water with variable force: sometimes
sending it to a great height, then again to a lower, which I
attribute to the variable pressure of the steam accumulated in its
reservoir.

At last we leave the island, rounding away past the low rocks on its
southern shore. Hans has taken advantage of the halt to refit his
rudder.

But before going any farther I make a few observations, to calculate
the distance we have gone over, and note them in my journal. We have
crossed two hundred and seventy leagues of sea since leaving Port
Gruben; and we are six hundred and twenty leagues from Iceland,
under England. [1]

[1] This distance carries the travellers as far as under the Pyrenees
if the league measures three miles. (Trans.)




CHAPTER XXXV.

AN ELECTRIC STORM


_Friday, August 21_.--On the morrow the magnificent geyser has
disappeared. The wind has risen, and has rapidly carried us away from
Axel Island. The roarings become lost in the distance.

The weather--if we may use that term--will change before long. The
atmosphere is charged with vapours, pervaded with the electricity
generated by the evaporation of saline waters. The clouds are sinking
lower, and assume an olive hue. The electric light can scarcely
penetrate through the dense curtain which has dropped over the
theatre on which the battle of the elements is about to be waged.

I feel peculiar sensations, like many creatures on earth at the
approach of violent atmospheric changes. The heavily voluted cumulus
clouds lower gloomily and threateningly; they wear that implacable
look which I have sometimes noticed at the outbreak of a great storm.
The air is heavy; the sea is calm.

In the distance the clouds resemble great bales of cotton, piled up
in picturesque disorder. By degrees they dilate, and gain in huge
size what they lose in number. Such is their ponderous weight that
they cannot rise from the horizon; but, obeying an impulse from
higher currents, their dense consistency slowly yields. The gloom
upon them deepens; and they soon present to our view a ponderous mass
of almost level surface. From time to time a fleecy tuft of mist,
with yet some gleaming light left upon it, drops down upon the dense
floor of grey, and loses itself in the opaque and impenetrable mass.

The atmosphere is evidently charged and surcharged with electricity.
My whole body is saturated; my hair bristles just as when you stand
upon an insulated stool under the action of an electrical machine. It
seems to me as if my companions, the moment they touched me, would
receive a severe shock like that from an electric eel.

At ten in the morning the symptoms of storm become aggravated. The
wind never lulls but to acquire increased strength; the vast bank of
heavy clouds is a huge reservoir of fearful windy gusts and rushing
storms.

I am loth to believe these atmospheric menaces, and yet I cannot help
muttering:

"Here's some very bad weather coming on."

The Professor made no answer. His temper is awful, to judge from the
working of his features, as he sees this vast length of ocean
unrolling before him to an indefinite extent. He can only spare time
to shrug his shoulders viciously.

"There's a heavy storm coming on," I cried, pointing towards the
horizon. "Those clouds seem as if they were going to crush the sea."

A deep silence falls on all around. The lately roaring winds are
hushed into a dead calm; nature seems to breathe no more, and to be
sinking into the stillness of death. On the mast already I see the
light play of a lambent St. Elmo's fire; the outstretched sail
catches not a breath of wind, and hangs like a sheet of lead. The
rudder stands motionless in a sluggish, waveless sea. But if we have
now ceased to advance why do we yet leave that sail loose, which at
the first shock of the tempest may capsize us in a moment?

"Let us reef the sail and cut the mast down!" I cried. "That will be
safest."

"No, no! Never!" shouted my impetuous uncle. "Never! Let the wind
catch us if it will! What I want is to get the least glimpse of rock
or shore, even if our raft should be smashed into shivers!"

The words were hardly out of his mouth when a sudden change took
place in the southern sky. The piled-up vapours condense into water;
and the air, put into violent action to supply the vacuum left by the
condensation of the mists, rouses itself into a whirlwind. It rushes
on from the farthest recesses of the vast cavern. The darkness
deepens; scarcely can I jot down a few hurried notes. The helm makes
a bound. My uncle falls full length; I creep close to him. He has
laid a firm hold upon a rope, and appears to watch with grim
satisfaction this awful display of elemental strife.

Hans stirs not. His long hair blown by the pelting storm, and laid
flat across his immovable countenance, makes him a strange figure;
for the end of each lock of loose flowing hair is tipped with little
luminous radiations. This frightful mask of electric sparks suggests
to me, even in this dizzy excitement, a comparison with pre-adamite
man, the contemporary of the ichthyosaurus and the megatherium. [1]

[1] Rather of the mammoth and the mastodon. (Trans.)

The mast yet holds firm. The sail stretches tight like a bubble ready
to burst. The raft flies at a rate that I cannot reckon, but not so
fast as the foaming clouds of spray which it dashes from side to side
in its headlong speed.

"The sail! the sail!" I cry, motioning to lower it.

"No!" replies my uncle.

"_Nej!_" repeats Hans, leisurely shaking his head.

But now the rain forms a rushing cataract in front of that horizon
toward which we are running with such maddening speed. But before it
has reached us the rain cloud parts asunder, the sea boils, and the
electric fires are brought into violent action by a mighty chemical
power that descends from the higher regions. The most vivid flashes
of lightning are mingled with the violent crash of continuous
thunder. Ceaseless fiery arrows dart in and out amongst the flying
thunder-clouds; the vaporous mass soon glows with incandescent heat;
hailstones rattle fiercely down, and as they dash upon our iron tools
they too emit gleams and flashes of lurid light. The heaving waves
resemble fiery volcanic hills, each belching forth its own interior
flames, and every crest is plumed with dancing fire. My eyes fail
under the dazzling light, my ears are stunned with the incessant
crash of thunder. I must be bound to the mast, which bows like a reed
before the mighty strength of the storm.

(Here my notes become vague and indistinct. I have only been able to
find a few which I seem to have jotted down almost unconsciously. But
their very brevity and their obscurity reveal the intensity of the
excitement which dominated me, and describe the actual position even
better than my memory could do.)

Sunday, 23.--Where are we? Driven forward with a swiftness that
cannot be measured.

The night was fearful; no abatement of the storm. The din and uproar
are incessant; our ears are bleeding; to exchange a word is
impossible.

The lightning flashes with intense brilliancy, and never seems to
cease for a moment. Zigzag streams of bluish white fire dash down
upon the sea and rebound, and then take an upward flight till they
strike the granite vault that overarches our heads. Suppose that
solid roof should crumble down upon our heads! Other flashes with
incessant play cross their vivid fires, while others again roll
themselves into balls of living fire which explode like bombshells,
but the music of which scarcely-adds to the din of the battle strife
that almost deprives us of our senses of hearing and sight; the limit
of intense loudness has been passed within which the human ear can
distinguish one sound from another. If all the powder magazines in
the world were to explode at once, we should hear no more than we do
now.

From the under surface of the clouds there are continual emissions of
lurid light; electric matter is in continual evolution from their
component molecules; the gaseous elements of the air need to be
slaked with moisture; for innumerable columns of water rush upwards
into the air and fall back again in white foam.

Whither are we flying? My uncle lies full length across the raft.

The heat increases. I refer to the thermometer; it indicates . . .
(the figure is obliterated).

_Monday, August 24._--Will there be an end to it? Is the atmospheric
condition, having once reached this density, to become final?

We are prostrated and worn out with fatigue. But Hans is as usual.
The raft bears on still to the south-east. We have made two hundred
leagues since we left Axel Island.

At noon the violence of the storm redoubles. We are obliged to secure
as fast as possible every article that belongs to our cargo. Each of
us is lashed to some part of the raft. The waves rise above our heads.

For three days we have never been able to make each other hear a
word. Our mouths open, our lips move, but not a word can be heard. We
cannot even make ourselves heard by approaching our mouth close to
the ear.

My uncle has drawn nearer to me. He has uttered a few words. They
seem to be 'We are lost'; but I am not sure.

At last I write down the words: "Let us lower the sail."

He nods his consent.

Scarcely has he lifted his head again before a ball of fire has
bounded over the waves and lighted on board our raft. Mast and sail
flew up in an instant together, and I saw them carried up to
prodigious height, resembling in appearance a pterodactyle, one of
those strong birds of the infant world.

We lay there, our blood running cold with unspeakable terror. The
fireball, half of it white, half azure blue, and the size of a
ten-inch shell, moved slowly about the raft, but revolving on its own
axis with astonishing velocity, as if whipped round by the force of
the whirlwind. Here it comes, there it glides, now it is up the
ragged stump of the mast, thence it lightly leaps on the provision
bag, descends with a light bound, and just skims the powder magazine.
Horrible! we shall be blown up; but no, the dazzling disk of
mysterious light nimbly leaps aside; it approaches Hans, who fixes
his blue eye upon it steadily; it threatens the head of my uncle, who
falls upon his knees with his head down to avoid it. And now my turn
comes; pale and trembling under the blinding splendour and the
melting heat, it drops at my feet, spinning silently round upon the
deck; I try to move my foot away, but cannot.

A suffocating smell of nitrogen fills the air, it enters the throat,
it fills the lungs. We suffer stifling pains.

Why am I unable to move my foot? Is it riveted to the planks? Alas!
the fall upon our fated raft of this electric globe has magnetised
every iron article on board. The instruments, the tools, our guns,
are clashing and clanking violently in their collisions with each
other; the nails of my boots cling tenaciously to a plate of iron let
into the timbers, and I cannot draw my foot away from the spot. At
last by a violent effort I release myself at the instant when the
ball in its gyrations was about to seize upon it, and carry me off my
feet ....

Ah! what a flood of intense and dazzling light! the globe has burst,
and we are deluged with tongues of fire!

Then all the light disappears. I could just see my uncle at full
length on the raft, and Hans still at his helm and spitting fire
under the action of the electricity which has saturated him.

But where are we going to? Where?

* * * *

_Tuesday, August 25._--I recover from a long swoon. The storm
continues to roar and rage; the lightnings dash hither and thither,
like broods of fiery serpents filling all the air. Are we still under
the sea? Yes, we are borne at incalculable speed. We have been
carried under England, under the channel, under France, perhaps under
the whole of Europe.

* * * *

A fresh noise is heard! Surely it is the sea breaking upon the rocks!
But then . . . .




CHAPTER XXXVI.

CALM PHILOSOPHIC DISCUSSIONS


Here I end what I may call my log, happily saved from the wreck, and
I resume my narrative as before.

What happened when the raft was dashed upon the rocks is more than I
can tell. I felt myself hurled into the waves; and if I escaped from
death, and if my body was not torn over the sharp edges of the rocks,
it was because the powerful arm of Hans came to my rescue.

The brave Icelander carried me out of the reach of the waves, over a
burning sand where I found myself by the side of my uncle.

Then he returned to the rocks, against which the furious waves were
beating, to save what he could. I was unable to speak. I was
shattered with fatigue and excitement; I wanted a whole hour to
recover even a little.

But a deluge of rain was still falling, though with that violence
which generally denotes the near cessation of a storm. A few
overhanging rocks afforded us some shelter from the storm. Hans
prepared some food, which I could not touch; and each of us,
exhausted with three sleepless nights, fell into a broken and painful
sleep.

The next day the weather was splendid. The sky and the sea had sunk
into sudden repose. Every trace of the awful storm had disappeared.
The exhilarating voice of the Professor fell upon my ears as I awoke;
he was ominously cheerful.

"Well, my boy," he cried, "have you slept well?"

Would not any one have thought that we were still in our cheerful
little house on the Knigstrasse and that I was only just coming down
to breakfast, and that I was to be married to Gruben that day?

Alas! if the tempest had but sent the raft a little more east, we
should have passed under Germany, under my beloved town of Hamburg,
under the very street where dwelt all that I loved most in the world.
Then only forty leagues would have separated us! But they were forty
leagues perpendicular of solid granite wall, and in reality we were a
thousand leagues asunder!

All these painful reflections rapidly crossed my mind before I could
answer my uncle's question.

"Well, now," he repeated, "won't you tell me how you have slept?"

"Oh, very well," I said. "I am only a little knocked up, but I shall
soon be better."

"Oh," says my uncle, "that's nothing to signify. You are only a
little bit tired."

"But you, uncle, you seem in very good spirits this morning."

"Delighted, my boy, delighted. We have got there."

"To our journey's end?"

"No; but we have got to the end of that endless sea. Now we shall go
by land, and really begin to go down! down! down!"

"But, my dear uncle, do let me ask you one question."

"Of course, Axel."

"How about returning?"

"Returning? Why, you are talking about the return before the arrival."

"No, I only want to know how that is to be managed."

"In the simplest way possible. When we have reached the centre of the
globe, either we shall find some new way to get back, or we shall
come back like decent folks the way we came. I feel pleased at the
thought that it is sure not to be shut against us."

"But then we shall have to refit the raft."

"Of course."

"Then, as to provisions, have we enough to last?"

"Yes; to be sure we have. Hans is a clever fellow, and I am sure he
must have saved a large part of our cargo. But still let us go and
make sure."

We left this grotto which lay open to every wind. At the same time I
cherished a trembling hope which was a fear as well. It seemed to me
impossible that the terrible wreck of the raft should not have
destroyed everything on board. On my arrival on the shore I found
Hans surrounded by an assemblage of articles all arranged in good
order. My uncle shook hands with him with a lively gratitude. This
man, with almost superhuman devotion, had been at work all the while
that we were asleep, and had saved the most precious of the articles
at the risk of his life.

Not that we had suffered no losses. For instance, our firearms; but
we might do without them. Our stock of powder had remained uninjured
after having risked blowing up during the storm.

"Well," cried the Professor, "as we have no guns we cannot hunt,
that's all."

"Yes, but how about the instruments?"

"Here is the aneroid, the most useful of all, and for which I would
have given all the others. By means of it I can calculate the depth
and know when we have reached the centre; without it we might very
likely go beyond, and come out at the antipodes!"

Such high spirits as these were rather too strong.

"But where is the compass? I asked.

"Here it is, upon this rock, in perfect condition, as well as the
thermometers and the chronometer. The hunter is a splendid fellow."

There was no denying it. We had all our instruments. As for tools and
appliances, there they all lay on the ground--ladders, ropes, picks,
spades, etc.

Still there was the question of provisions to be settled, and I
asked--"How are we off for provisions?"

The boxes containing these were in a line upon the shore, in a
perfect state of preservation; for the most part the sea had spared
them, and what with biscuits, salt meat, spirits, and salt fish, we
might reckon on four months' supply.

"Four months!" cried the Professor. "We have time to go and to
return; and with what is left I will give a grand dinner to my
friends at the Johannum."

I ought by this time to have been quite accustomed to my uncle's
ways; yet there was always something fresh about him to astonish me.

"Now," said he, "we will replenish our supply of water with the rain
which the storm has left in all these granite basins; therefore we
shall have no reason to fear anything from thirst. As for the raft, I
will recommend Hans to do his best to repair it, although I don't
expect it will be of any further use to us."

"How so?" I cried.

"An idea of my own, my lad. I don't think we shall come out by the
way that we went in."

I stared at the Professor with a good deal of mistrust. I asked, was
he not touched in the brain? And yet there was method in his madness.

"And now let us go to breakfast," said he.

I followed him to a headland, after he had given his instructions to
the hunter. There preserved meat, biscuit, and tea made us an
excellent meal, one of the best I ever remember. Hunger, the fresh
air, the calm quiet weather, after the commotions we had gone
through, all contributed to give me a good appetite.

Whilst breakfasting I took the opportunity to put to my uncle the
question where we were now.

"That seems to me," I said, "rather difficult to make out."

"Yes, it is difficult," he said, "to calculate exactly; perhaps even
impossible, since during these three stormy days I have been unable
to keep any account of the rate or direction of the raft; but still
we may get an approximation."

"The last observation," I remarked, "was made on the island, when the
geyser was--"

"You mean Axel Island. Don't decline the honour of having given your
name to the first island ever discovered in the central parts of the
globe."

"Well," said I, "let it be Axel Island. Then we had cleared two
hundred and seventy leagues of sea, and we were six hundred leagues
from Iceland."

"Very well," answered my uncle; "let us start from that point and
count four days' storm, during which our rate cannot have been less
than eighty leagues in the twenty-four hours."

"That is right; and this would make three hundred leagues more."

"Yes, and the Liedenbrock sea would be six hundred leagues from shore
to shore. Surely, Axel, it may vie in size with the Mediterranean
itself."

"Especially," I replied, "if it happens that we have only crossed it
in its narrowest part. And it is a curious circumstance," I added,
"that if my computations are right, and we are nine hundred leagues
from Rejkiavik, we have now the Mediterranean above our head."

"That is a good long way, my friend. But whether we are under Turkey
or the Atlantic depends very much upon the question in what direction
we have been moving. Perhaps we have deviated."

"No, I think not. Our course has been the same all along, and I
believe this shore is south-east of Port Gruben."

"Well," replied my uncle, "we may easily ascertain this by consulting
the compass. Let us go and see what it says."

The Professor moved towards the rock upon which Hans had laid down
the instruments. He was gay and full of spirits; he rubbed his hands,
he studied his attitudes. I followed him, curious to know if I was
right in my estimate. As soon as we had arrived at the rock my uncle
took the compass, laid it horizontally, and questioned the needle,
which, after a few oscillations, presently assumed a fixed position.
My uncle looked, and looked, and looked again. He rubbed his eyes,
and then turned to me thunderstruck with some unexpected discovery.

"What is the matter?" I asked.

He motioned to me to look. An exclamation of astonishment burst from
me. The north pole of the needle was turned to what we supposed to be
the south. It pointed to the shore instead of to the open sea! I
shook the box, examined it again, it was in perfect condition. In
whatever position I placed the box the needle pertinaciously returned
to this unexpected quarter. Therefore there seemed no reason to doubt
that during the storm there had been a sudden change of wind
unperceived by us, which had brought our raft back to the shore which
we thought we had left so long a distance behind us.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE LIEDENBROCK MUSEUM OF GEOLOGY


How shall I describe the strange series of passions which in
succession shook the breast of Professor Liedenbrock? First
stupefaction, then incredulity, lastly a downright burst of rage.
Never had I seen the man so put out of countenance and so disturbed.
The fatigues of our passage across, the dangers met, had all to be
begun over again. We had gone backwards instead of forwards!

But my uncle rapidly recovered himself.

"Aha! will fate play tricks upon me? Will the elements lay plots
against me? Shall fire, air, and water make a combined attack against
me? Well, they shall know what a determined man can do. I will not
yield. I will not stir a single foot backwards, and it will be seen
whether man or nature is to have the upper hand!"

Erect upon the rock, angry and threatening, Otto Liedenbrock was a
rather grotesque fierce parody upon the fierce Achilles defying the
lightning. But I thought it my duty to interpose and attempt to lay
some restraint upon this unmeasured fanaticism.

"Just listen to me," I said firmly. "Ambition must have a limit
somewhere; we cannot perform impossibilities; we are not at all fit
for another sea voyage; who would dream of undertaking a voyage of
five hundred leagues upon a heap of rotten planks, with a blanket in
rags for a sail, a stick for a mast, and fierce winds in our teeth?
We cannot steer; we shall be buffeted by the tempests, and we should
be fools and madmen to attempt to cross a second time."

I was able to develop this series of unanswerable reasons for ten
minutes without interruption; not that the Professor was paying any
respectful attention to his nephew's arguments, but because he was
deaf to all my eloquence.

"To the raft!" he shouted.

Such was his only reply. It was no use for me to entreat, supplicate,
get angry, or do anything else in the way of opposition; it would
only have been opposing a will harder than the granite rock.

Hans was finishing the repairs of the raft. One would have thought
that this strange being was guessing at my uncle's intentions. With a
few more pieces of surturbrand he had refitted our vessel. A sail
already hung from the new mast, and the wind was playing in its
waving folds.

The Professor said a few words to the guide, and immediately he put
everything on board and arranged every necessary for our departure.
The air was clear--and the north-west wind blew steadily.

What could I do? Could I stand against the two? It was impossible? If
Hans had but taken my side! But no, it was not to be. The Icelander
seemed to have renounced all will of his own and made a vow to forget
and deny himself. I could get nothing out of a servant so feudalised,
as it were, to his master. My only course was to proceed.

I was therefore going with as much resignation as I could find to
resume my accustomed place on the raft, when my uncle laid his hand
upon my shoulder.

"We shall not sail until to-morrow," he said.

I made a movement intended to express resignation.

"I must neglect nothing," he said; "and since my fate has driven me
on this part of the coast, I will not leave it until I have examined
it."

To understand what followed, it must be borne in mind that, through
circumstances hereafter to be explained, we were not really where the
Professor supposed we were. In fact we were not upon the north shore
of the sea.

"Now let us start upon fresh discoveries," I said.

And leaving Hans to his work we started off together. The space
between the water and the foot of the cliffs was considerable. It
took half an hour to bring us to the wall of rock. We trampled under
our feet numberless shells of all the forms and sizes which existed
in the earliest ages of the world. I also saw immense carapaces more
than fifteen feet in diameter. They had been the coverings of those
gigantic glyptodons or armadilloes of the pleiocene period, of which
the modern tortoise is but a miniature representative. [1] The soil
was besides this scattered with stony fragments, boulders rounded by
water action, and ridged up in successive lines. I was therefore led
to the conclusion that at one time the sea must have covered the
ground on which we were treading. On the loose and scattered rocks,
now out of the reach of the highest tides, the waves had left
manifest traces of their power to wear their way in the hardest stone.

This might up to a certain point explain the existence of an ocean
forty leagues beneath the surface of the globe. But in my opinion
this liquid mass would be lost by degrees farther and farther within
the interior of the earth, and it certainly had its origin in the
waters of the ocean overhead, which had made their way hither through
some fissure. Yet it must be believed that that fissure is now
closed, and that all this cavern or immense reservoir was filled in a
very short time. Perhaps even this water, subjected to the fierce
action of central heat, had partly been resolved into vapour. This
would explain the existence of those clouds suspended over our heads
and the development of that electricity which raised such tempests
within the bowels of the earth.

This theory of the phenomena we had witnessed seemed satisfactory to
me; for however great and stupendous the phenomena of nature, fixed
physical laws will or may always explain them.

We were therefore walking upon sedimentary soil, the deposits of the
waters of former ages. The Professor was carefully examining every
little fissure in the rocks. Wherever he saw a hole he always wanted
to know the depth of it. To him this was important.

We had traversed the shores of the Liedenbrock sea for a mile when we
observed a sudden change in the appearance of the soil. It seemed
upset, contorted, and convulsed by a violent upheaval of the lower
strata. In many places depressions or elevations gave witness to some
tremendous power effecting the dislocation of strata.

[1] The glyptodon and armadillo are mammalian; the tortoise is a
chelonian, a reptile, distinct classes of the animal kingdom;
therefore the latter cannot be a representative of the former.
(Trans.)

We moved with difficulty across these granite fissures and chasms
mingled with silex, crystals of quartz, and alluvial deposits, when a
field, nay, more than a field, a vast plain, of bleached bones lay
spread before us. It seemed like an immense cemetery, where the
remains of twenty ages mingled their dust together. Huge mounds of
bony fragments rose stage after stage in the distance. They undulated
away to the limits of the horizon, and melted in the distance in a
faint haze. There within three square miles were accumulated the
materials for a complete history of the animal life of ages, a
history scarcely outlined in the too recent strata of the inhabited
world.

But an impatient curiosity impelled our steps; crackling and
rattling, our feet were trampling on the remains of prehistoric
animals and interesting fossils, the possession of which is a matter
of rivalry and contention between the museums of great cities. A
thousand Cuviers could never have reconstructed the organic remains
deposited in this magnificent and unparalleled collection.

I stood amazed. My uncle had uplifted his long arms to the vault
which was our sky; his mouth gaping wide, his eyes flashing behind
his shining spectacles, his head balancing with an up-and-down
motion, his whole attitude denoted unlimited astonishment. Here he
stood facing an immense collection of scattered leptotheria,
mericotheria, lophiodia, anoplotheria, megatheria, mastodons,
protopithec, pterodactyles, and all sorts of extinct monsters here
assembled together for his special satisfaction. Fancy an
enthusiastic bibliomaniac suddenly brought into the midst of the
famous Alexandrian library burnt by Omar and restored by a miracle
from its ashes! just such a crazed enthusiast was my uncle, Professor
Liedenbrock.

But more was to come, when, with a rush through clouds of bone dust,
he laid his hand upon a bare skull, and cried with a voice trembling
with excitement:

"Axel! Axel! a human head!"

"A human skull?" I cried, no less astonished.

"Yes, nephew. Aha! M. Milne-Edwards! Ah! M. de Quatrefages, how I
wish you were standing here at the side of Otto Liedenbrock!"




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE PROFESSOR IN HIS CHAIR AGAIN


To understand this apostrophe of my uncle's, made to absent French
savants, it will be necessary to allude to an event of high
importance in a palontological point of view, which had occurred a
little while before our departure.

On the 28th of March, 1863, some excavators working under the
direction of M. Boucher de Perthes, in the stone quarries of Moulin
Quignon, near Abbeville, in the department of Somme, found a human
jawbone fourteen feet beneath the surface. It was the first fossil of
this nature that had ever been brought to light. Not far distant were
found stone hatchets and flint arrow-heads stained and encased by
lapse of time with a uniform coat of rust.

The noise of this discovery was very great, not in France alone, but in
England and in Germany. Several savants of the French Institute, and
amongst them MM. Milne-Edwards and de Quatrefages, saw at once the
importance of this discovery, proved to demonstration the genuineness of
the bone in question, and became the most ardent defendants in what the
English called this 'trial of a jawbone.' To the geologists of the
United Kingdom, who believed in the certainty of the fact--Messrs.
Falconer, Busk, Carpenter, and others--scientific Germans were soon
joined, and amongst them the forwardest, the most fiery, and the most
enthusiastic, was my uncle Liedenbrock.

Therefore the genuineness of a fossil human relic of the quaternary
period seemed to be incontestably proved and admitted.

It is true that this theory met with a most obstinate opponent in M.
Elie de Beaumont. This high authority maintained that the soil of
Moulin Quignon was not diluvial at all, but was of much more recent
formation; and, agreeing in that with Cuvier, he refused to admit
that the human species could be contemporary with the animals of the
quaternary period. My uncle Liedenbrock, along with the great body of
the geologists, had maintained his ground, disputed, and argued,
until M. Elie de Beaumont stood almost alone in his opinion.

We knew all these details, but we were not aware that since our
departure the question had advanced to farther stages. Other similar
maxillaries, though belonging to individuals of various types and
different nations, were found in the loose grey soil of certain
grottoes in France, Switzerland, and Belgium, as well as weapons,
tools, earthen utensils, bones of children and adults. The existence
therefore of man in the quaternary period seemed to become daily more
certain.

Nor was this all. Fresh discoveries of remains in the pleiocene
formation had emboldened other geologists to refer back the human
species to a higher antiquity still. It is true that these remains
were not human bones, but objects bearing the traces of his
handiwork, such as fossil leg-bones of animals, sculptured and carved
evidently by the hand of man.

Thus, at one bound, the record of the existence of man receded far
back into the history of the ages past; he was a predecessor of the
mastodon; he was a contemporary of the southern elephant; he lived a
hundred thousand years ago, when, according to geologists, the
pleiocene formation was in progress.

Such then was the state of palontological science, and what we knew
of it was sufficient to explain our behaviour in the presence of this
stupendous Golgotha. Any one may now understand the frenzied
excitement of my uncle, when, twenty yards farther on, he found
himself face to face with a primitive man!

It was a perfectly recognisable human body. Had some particular soil,
like that of the cemetery St. Michel, at Bordeaux, preserved it thus
for so many ages? It might be so. But this dried corpse, with its
parchment-like skin drawn tightly over the bony frame, the limbs
still preserving their shape, sound teeth, abundant hair, and finger
and toe nails of frightful length, this desiccated mummy startled us
by appearing just as it had lived countless ages ago. I stood mute
before this apparition of remote antiquity. My uncle, usually so
garrulous, was struck dumb likewise. We raised the body. We stood it
up against a rock. It seemed to stare at us out of its empty orbits.
We sounded with our knuckles his hollow frame.

After some moments' silence the Professor was himself again. Otto
Liedenbrock, yielding to his nature, forgot all the circumstances of
our eventful journey, forgot where we were standing, forgot the
vaulted cavern which contained us. No doubt he was in mind back again
in his Johannum, holding forth to his pupils, for he assumed his
learned air; and addressing himself to an imaginary audience, he
proceeded thus:

"Gentlemen, I have the honour to introduce to you a man of the
quaternary or post-tertiary system. Eminent geologists have denied
his existence, others no less eminent have affirmed it. The St.
Thomases of palontology, if they were here, might now touch him with
their fingers, and would be obliged to acknowledge their error. I am
quite aware that science has to be on its guard with discoveries of
this kind. I know what capital enterprising individuals like Barnum
have made out of fossil men. I have heard the tale of the kneepan of
Ajax, the pretended body of Orestes claimed to have been found by the
Spartans, and of the body of Asterius, ten cubits long, of which
Pausanias speaks. I have read the reports of the skeleton of Trapani,
found in the fourteenth century, and which was at the time identified
as that of Polyphemus; and the history of the giant unearthed in the
sixteenth century near Palermo. You know as well as I do, gentlemen,
the analysis made at Lucerne in 1577 of those huge bones which the
celebrated Dr. Felix Plater affirmed to be those of a giant nineteen
feet high. I have gone through the treatises of Cassanion, and all
those memoirs, pamphlets, answers, and rejoinders published
respecting the skeleton of Teutobochus, the invader of Gaul, dug out
of a sandpit in the Dauphin, in 1613. In the eighteenth century I
would have stood up for Scheuchzer's pre-adamite man against Peter
Campet. I have perused a writing, entitled Gigan--"

Here my uncle's unfortunate infirmity met him--that of being unable
in public to pronounce hard words.

"The pamphlet entitled Gigan--"

He could get no further.

"Giganteo--"

It was not to be done. The unlucky word would not come out. At the
Johannum there would have been a laugh.

"Gigantosteologie," at last the Professor burst out, between two
words which I shall not record here.

Then rushing on with renewed vigour, and with great animation:

"Yes, gentlemen, I know all these things, and more. I know that
Cuvier and Blumenbach have recognised in these bones nothing more
remarkable than the bones of the mammoth and other mammals of the
post-tertiary period. But in the presence of this specimen to doubt
would be to insult science. There stands the body! You may see it,
touch it. It is not a mere skeleton; it is an entire body, preserved
for a purely anthropological end and purpose."

I was good enough not to contradict this startling assertion.

"If I could only wash it in a solution of sulphuric acid," pursued my
uncle, "I should be able to clear it from all the earthy particles
and the shells which are incrusted about it. But I do not possess
that valuable solvent. Yet, such as it is, the body shall tell us its
own wonderful story."

Here the Professor laid hold of the fossil skeleton, and handled it
with the skill of a dexterous showman.

"You see," he said, "that it is not six feet long, and that we are
still separated by a long interval from the pretended race of giants.
As for the family to which it belongs, it is evidently Caucasian. It
is the white race, our own. The skull of this fossil is a regular
oval, or rather ovoid. It exhibits no prominent cheekbones, no
projecting jaws. It presents no appearance of that prognathism which
diminishes the facial angle. [1] Measure that angle. It is nearly
ninety degrees. But I will go further in my deductions, and I will
affirm that this specimen of the human family is of the Japhetic
race, which has since spread from the Indies to the Atlantic. Don't
smile, gentlemen."

Nobody was smiling; but the learned Professor was frequently
disturbed by the broad smiles provoked by his learned eccentricities.

"Yes," he pursued with animation, "this is a fossil man, the
contemporary of the mastodons whose remains fill this amphitheatre.
But if you ask me how he came there, how those strata on which he lay
slipped down into this enormous hollow in the globe, I confess I
cannot answer that question. No doubt in the post-tertiary period
considerable commotions were still disturbing the crust of the earth.
The long-continued cooling of the globe produced chasms, fissures,
clefts, and faults, into which, very probably, portions of the upper
earth may have fallen. I make no rash assertions; but there is the
man surrounded by his own works, by hatchets, by flint arrow-heads,
which are the characteristics of the stone age. And unless he came
here, like myself, as a tourist on a visit and as a pioneer of
science, I can entertain no doubt of the authenticity of his remote
origin."

[1] The facial angle is formed by two lines, one touching the brow
and the front teeth, the other from the orifice of the ear to the
lower line of the nostrils. The greater this angle, the higher
intelligence denoted by the formation of the skull. Prognathism is
that projection of the jaw-bones which sharpens or lessons this
angle, and which is illustrated in the negro countenance and in the
lowest savages.

The Professor ceased to speak, and the audience broke out into loud
and unanimous applause. For of course my uncle was right, and wiser
men than his nephew would have had some trouble to refute his
statements.

Another remarkable thing. This fossil body was not the only one in
this immense catacomb. We came upon other bodies at every step
amongst this mortal dust, and my uncle might select the most curious
of these specimens to demolish the incredulity of sceptics.

In fact it was a wonderful spectacle, that of these generations of
men and animals commingled in a common cemetery. Then one very
serious question arose presently which we scarcely dared to suggest.
Had all those creatures slided through a great fissure in the crust
of the earth, down to the shores of the Liedenbrock sea, when they
were dead and turning to dust, or had they lived and grown and died
here in this subterranean world under a false sky, just like
inhabitants of the upper earth? Until the present time we had seen
alive only marine monsters and fishes. Might not some living man,
some native of the abyss, be yet a wanderer below on this desert
strand?




CHAPTER XXXIX.

FOREST SCENERY ILLUMINATED BY ELECTRICITY


For another half hour we trod upon a pavement of bones. We pushed on,
impelled by our burning curiosity. What other marvels did this cavern
contain? What new treasures lay here for science to unfold? I was
prepared for any surprise, my imagination was ready for any
astonishment however astounding.

We had long lost sight of the sea shore behind the hills of bones.
The rash Professor, careless of losing his way, hurried me forward.
We advanced in silence, bathed in luminous electric fluid. By some
phenomenon which I am unable to explain, it lighted up all sides of
every object equally. Such was its diffusiveness, there being no
central point from which the light emanated, that shadows no longer
existed. You might have thought yourself under the rays of a vertical
sun in a tropical region at noonday and the height of summer. No
vapour was visible. The rocks, the distant mountains, a few isolated
clumps of forest trees in the distance, presented a weird and
wonderful aspect under these totally new conditions of a universal
diffusion of light. We were like Hoffmann's shadowless man.

After walking a mile we reached the outskirts of a vast forest, but
not one of those forests of fungi which bordered Port Gruben.

Here was the vegetation of the tertiary period in its fullest blaze
of magnificence. Tall palms, belonging to species no longer living,
splendid palmacites, firs, yews, cypress trees, thujas,
representatives of the conifers, were linked together by a tangled
network of long climbing plants. A soft carpet of moss and hepaticas
luxuriously clothed the soil. A few sparkling streams ran almost in
silence under what would have been the shade of the trees, but that
there was no shadow. On their banks grew tree-ferns similar to those
we grow in hothouses. But a remarkable feature was the total absence
of colour in all those trees, shrubs, and plants, growing without the
life-giving heat and light of the sun. Everything seemed mixed-up and
confounded in one uniform silver grey or light brown tint like that
of fading and faded leaves. Not a green leaf anywhere, and the
flowers--which were abundant enough in the tertiary period, which
first gave birth to flowers--looked like brown-paper flowers,
without colour or scent.

My uncle Liedenbrock ventured to penetrate under this colossal grove.
I followed him, not without fear. Since nature had here provided
vegetable nourishment, why should not the terrible mammals be there
too? I perceived in the broad clearings left by fallen trees, decayed
with age, leguminose plants, acerine, rubice and many other eatable
shrubs, dear to ruminant animals at every period. Then I observed,
mingled together in confusion, trees of countries far apart on the
surface of the globe. The oak and the palm were growing side by side,
the Australian eucalyptus leaned against the Norwegian pine, the
birch-tree of the north mingled its foliage with New Zealand kauris.
It was enough to distract the most ingenious classifier of
terrestrial botany.

Suddenly I halted. I drew back my uncle.

The diffused light revealed the smallest object in the dense and
distant thickets. I had thought I saw--no! I did see, with my own
eyes, vast colossal forms moving amongst the trees. They were
gigantic animals; it was a herd of mastodons--not fossil remains,
but living and resembling those the bones of which were found in the
marshes of Ohio in 1801. I saw those huge elephants whose long,
flexible trunks were grouting and turning up the soil under the trees
like a legion of serpents. I could hear the crashing noise of their
long ivory tusks boring into the old decaying trunks. The boughs
cracked, and the leaves torn away by cartloads went down the
cavernous throats of the vast brutes.

So, then, the dream in which I had had a vision of the prehistoric
world, of the tertiary and post-tertiary periods, was now realised.
And there we were alone, in the bowels of the earth, at the mercy of
its wild inhabitants!

My uncle was gazing with intense and eager interest.

"Come on!" said he, seizing my arm. "Forward! forward!"

"No, I will not!" I cried. "We have no firearms. What could we do in the
midst of a herd of these four-footed giants? Come away, uncle--come! No
human being may with safety dare the anger of these monstrous beasts."

"No human creature?" replied my uncle in a lower voice. "You are
wrong, Axel. Look, look down there! I fancy I see a living creature
similar to ourselves: it is a man!"

I looked, shaking my head incredulously. But though at first I was
unbelieving I had to yield to the evidence of my senses.

In fact, at a distance of a quarter of a mile, leaning against the
trunk of a gigantic kauri, stood a human being, the Proteus of those
subterranean regions, a new son of Neptune, watching this countless
herd of mastodons.

Immanis pecoris custos, immanior ipse. [1]

[1] "The shepherd of gigantic herds, and huger still himself."

Yes, truly, huger still himself. It was no longer a fossil being like
him whose dried remains we had easily lifted up in the field of
bones; it was a giant, able to control those monsters. In stature he
was at least twelve feet high. His head, huge and unshapely as a
buffalo's, was half hidden in the thick and tangled growth of his
unkempt hair. It most resembled the mane of the primitive elephant.
In his hand he wielded with ease an enormous bough, a staff worthy of
this shepherd of the geologic period.

We stood petrified and speechless with amazement. But he might see
us! We must fly!

"Come, do come!" I said to my uncle, who for once allowed himself to
be persuaded.

In another quarter of an hour our nimble heels had carried us beyond
the reach of this horrible monster.

And yet, now that I can reflect quietly, now that my spirit has grown
calm again, now that months have slipped by since this strange and
supernatural meeting, what am I to think? what am I to believe? I
must conclude that it was impossible that our senses had been
deceived, that our eyes did not see what we supposed they saw. No
human being lives in this subterranean world; no generation of men
dwells in those inferior caverns of the globe, unknown to and
unconnected with the inhabitants of its surface. It is absurd to
believe it!

I had rather admit that it may have been some animal whose structure
resembled the human, some ape or baboon of the early geological ages,
some protopitheca, or some mesopitheca, some early or middle ape like
that discovered by Mr. Lartet in the bone cave of Sansau. But this
creature surpassed in stature all the measurements known in modern
palontology. But that a man, a living man, and therefore whole
generations doubtless besides, should be buried there in the bowels
of the earth, is impossible.

However, we had left behind us the luminous forest, dumb with
astonishment, overwhelmed and struck down with a terror which
amounted to stupefaction. We kept running on for fear the horrible
monster might be on our track. It was a flight, a fall, like that
fearful pulling and dragging which is peculiar to nightmare.
Instinctively we got back to the Liedenbrock sea, and I cannot say
into what vagaries my mind would not have carried me but for a
circumstance which brought me back to practical matters.

Although I was certain that we were now treading upon a soil not
hitherto touched by our feet, I often perceived groups of rocks which
reminded me of those about Port Gruben. Besides, this seemed to
confirm the indications of the needle, and to show that we had
against our will returned to the north of the Liedenbrock sea.
Occasionally we felt quite convinced. Brooks and waterfalls were
tumbling everywhere from the projections in the rocks. I thought I
recognised the bed of surturbrand, our faithful Hansbach, and the
grotto in which I had recovered life and consciousness. Then a few
paces farther on, the arrangement of the cliffs, the appearance of an
unrecognised stream, or the strange outline of a rock, came to throw
me again into doubt.

I communicated my doubts to my uncle. Like myself, he hesitated; he
could recognise nothing again amidst this monotonous scene.

"Evidently," said I, "we have not landed again at our original
starting point, but the storm has carried us a little higher, and if
we follow the shore we shall find Port Gruben."

"If that is the case it will be useless to continue our exploration,
and we had better return to our raft. But, Axel, are you not
mistaken?"

"It is difficult to speak decidedly, uncle, for all these rocks are
so very much alike. Yet I think I recognise the promontory at the
foot of which Hans constructed our launch. We must be very near the
little port, if indeed this is not it," I added, examining a creek
which I thought I recognised.

"No, Axel, we should at least find our own traces and I see nothing--"

"But I do see," I cried, darting upon an object lying on the sand.

And I showed my uncle a rusty dagger which I had just picked up.

"Come," said he, "had you this weapon with you?"

"I! No, certainly! But you, perhaps--"

"Not that I am aware," said the Professor. "I have never had this
object in my possession."

"Well, this is strange!"

"No, Axel, it is very simple. The Icelanders often wear arms of this
kind. This must have belonged to Hans, and he has lost it."

I shook my head. Hans had never had an object like this in his
possession.

"Did it not belong to some pre-adamite warrior?" I cried, "to some
living man, contemporary with the huge cattle-driver? But no. This is
not a relic of the stone age. It is not even of the iron age. This
blade is steel--"

My uncle stopped me abruptly on my way to a dissertation which would
have taken me a long way, and said coolly:

"Be calm, Axel, and reasonable. This dagger belongs to the sixteenth
century; it is a poniard, such as gentlemen carried in their belts to
give the coup _de grace._ Its origin is Spanish. It was never either
yours, or mine, or the hunter's, nor did it belong to any of those
human beings who may or may not inhabit this inner world. See, it was
never jagged like this by cutting men's throats; its blade is coated
with a rust neither a day, nor a year, nor a hundred years old."

The Professor was getting excited according to his wont, and was
allowing his imagination to run away with him.

"Axel, we are on the way towards the grand discovery. This blade has
been left on the strand for from one to three hundred years, and has
blunted its edge upon the rocks that fringe this subterranean sea!"

"But it has not come alone. It has not twisted itself out of shape;
some one has been here before us!

"Yes--a man has."

"And who was that man?"

"A man who has engraved his name somewhere with that dagger. That man
wanted once more to mark the way to the centre of the earth. Let us
look about: look about!"

And, wonderfully interested, we peered all along the high wall,
peeping into every fissure which might open out into a gallery.

And so we arrived at a place where the shore was much narrowed. Here
the sea came to lap the foot of the steep cliff, leaving a passage no
wider than a couple of yards. Between two boldly projecting rocks
appeared the mouth of a dark tunnel.

There, upon a granite slab, appeared two mysterious graven letters,
half eaten away by time. They were the initials of the bold and
daring traveller:

[Runic initials appear here]

"A. S.," shouted my uncle. "Arne Saknussemm! Arne Saknussemm
everywhere!"




CHAPTER XL.

PREPARATIONS FOR BLASTING A PASSAGE TO THE CENTRE OF THE EARTH


Since the start upon this marvellous pilgrimage I had been through so
many astonishments that I might well be excused for thinking myself
well hardened against any further surprise. Yet at the sight of these
two letters, engraved on this spot three hundred years ago, I stood
aghast in dumb amazement. Not only were the initials of the learned
alchemist visible upon the living rock, but there lay the iron point
with which the letters had been engraved. I could no longer doubt of
the existence of that wonderful traveller and of the fact of his
unparalleled journey, without the most glaring incredulity.

Whilst these reflections were occupying me, Professor Liedenbrock had
launched into a somewhat rhapsodical eulogium, of which Arne
Saknussemm was, of course, the hero.

"Thou marvellous genius!" he cried, "thou hast not forgotten one
indication which might serve to lay open to mortals the road through
the terrestrial crust; and thy fellow-creatures may even now, after
the lapse of three centuries, again trace thy footsteps through these
deep and darksome ways. You reserved the contemplation of these
wonders for other eyes besides your own. Your name, graven from stage
to stage, leads the bold follower of your footsteps to the very
centre of our planet's core, and there again we shall find your own
name written with your own hand. I too will inscribe my name upon
this dark granite page. But for ever henceforth let this cape that
advances into the sea discovered by yourself be known by your own
illustrious name--Cape Saknussemm."

Such were the glowing words of panegyric which fell upon my attentive
ear, and I could not resist the sentiment of enthusiasm with which I
too was infected. The fire of zeal kindled afresh in me. I forgot
everything. I dismissed from my mind the past perils of the journey,
the future danger of our return. That which another had done I
supposed we might also do, and nothing that was not superhuman
appeared impossible to me.

"Forward! forward!" I cried.

I was already darting down the gloomy tunnel when the Professor
stopped me; he, the man of impulse, counselled patience and coolness.

"Let us first return to Hans," he said, "and bring the raft to this
spot."

I obeyed, not without dissatisfaction, and passed out rapidly among
the rocks on the shore.

I said: "Uncle, do you know it seems to me that circumstances have
wonderfully befriended us hitherto?"

"You think so, Axel?"

"No doubt; even the tempest has put us on the right way. Blessings on
that storm! It has brought us back to this coast from which fine
weather would have carried us far away. Suppose we had touched with
our prow (the prow of a rudder!) the southern shore of the
Liedenbrock sea, what would have become of us? We should never have
seen the name of Saknussemm, and we should at this moment be
imprisoned on a rockbound, impassable coast."

"Yes, Axel, it is providential that whilst supposing we were steering
south we should have just got back north at Cape Saknussemm. I must
say that this is astonishing, and that I feel I have no way to
explain it."

"What does that signify, uncle? Our business is not to explain facts,
but to use them!"

"Certainly; but--"

"Well, uncle, we are going to resume the northern route, and to pass
under the north countries of Europe--under Sweden, Russia, Siberia:
who knows where?--instead of burrowing under the deserts of Africa,
or perhaps the waves of the Atlantic; and that is all I want to know."

"Yes, Axel, you are right. It is all for the best, since we have left
that weary, horizontal sea, which led us nowhere. Now we shall go
down, down, down! Do you know that it is now only 1,500 leagues to
the centre of the globe?"

"Is that all?" I cried. "Why, that's nothing. Let us start: march!"

All this crazy talk was going on still when we met the hunter.
Everything was made ready for our instant departure. Every bit of
cordage was put on board. We took our places, and with our sail set,
Hans steered us along the coast to Cape Saknussemm.

The wind was unfavourable to a species of launch not calculated for
shallow water. In many places we were obliged to push ourselves along
with iron-pointed sticks. Often the sunken rocks just beneath the
surface obliged us to deviate from our straight course. At last,
after three hours' sailing, about six in the evening we reached a
place suitable for our landing. I jumped ashore, followed by my uncle
and the Icelander. This short passage had not served to cool my
ardour. On the contrary, I even proposed to burn 'our ship,' to
prevent the possibility of return; but my uncle would not consent to
that. I thought him singularly lukewarm.

"At least," I said, "don't let us lose a minute."

"Yes, yes, lad," he replied; "but first let us examine this new
gallery, to see if we shall require our ladders."

My uncle put his Ruhmkorff's apparatus in action; the raft moored to
the shore was left alone; the mouth of the tunnel was not twenty
yards from us; and our party, with myself at the head, made for it
without a moment's delay.

The aperture, which was almost round, was about five feet in
diameter; the dark passage was cut out in the live rock and lined
with a coat of the eruptive matter which formerly issued from it; the
interior was level with the ground outside, so that we were able to
enter without difficulty. We were following a horizontal plane, when,
only six paces in, our progress was interrupted by an enormous block
just across our way.

"Accursed rock!" I cried in a passion, finding myself suddenly
confronted by an impassable obstacle.

Right and left we searched in vain for a way, up and down, side to
side; there was no getting any farther. I felt fearfully
disappointed, and I would not admit that the obstacle was final. I
stopped, I looked underneath the block: no opening. Above: granite
still. Hans passed his lamp over every portion of the barrier in
vain. We must give up all hope of passing it.

I sat down in despair. My uncle strode from side to side in the
narrow passage.

"But how was it with Saknussemm?" I cried.

"Yes," said my uncle, "was he stopped by this stone barrier?"

"No, no," I replied with animation. "This fragment of rock has been
shaken down by some shock or convulsion, or by one of those magnetic
storms which agitate these regions, and has blocked up the passage
which lay open to him. Many years have elapsed since the return of
Saknussemm to the surface and the fall of this huge fragment. Is it
not evident that this gallery was once the way open to the course of
the lava, and that at that time there must have been a free passage?
See here are recent fissures grooving and channelling the granite
roof. This roof itself is formed of fragments of rock carried down,
of enormous stones, as if by some giant's hand; but at one time the
expulsive force was greater than usual, and this block, like the
falling keystone of a ruined arch, has slipped down to the ground and
blocked up the way. It is only an accidental obstruction, not met by
Saknussemm, and if we don't destroy it we shall be unworthy to reach
the centre of the earth."

Such was my sentence! The soul of the Professor had passed into me.
The genius of discovery possessed me wholly. I forgot the past, I
scorned the future. I gave not a thought to the things of the surface
of this globe into which I had dived; its cities and its sunny
plains, Hamburg and the Knigstrasse, even poor Gruben, who must
have given us up for lost, all were for the time dismissed from the
pages of my memory.

"Well," cried my uncle, "let us make a way with our pickaxes."

"Too hard for the pickaxe."

"Well, then, the spade."

"That would take us too long."

"What, then?"

"Why gunpowder, to be sure! Let us mine the obstacle and blow it up."

"Oh, yes, it is only a bit of rock to blast!"

"Hans, to work!" cried my uncle.

The Icelander returned to the raft and soon came back with an iron
bar which he made use of to bore a hole for the charge. This was no
easy work. A hole was to be made large enough to hold fifty pounds of
guncotton, whose expansive force is four times that of gunpowder.

I was terribly excited. Whilst Hans was at work I was actively
helping my uncle to prepare a slow match of wetted powder encased in
linen.

"This will do it," I said.

"It will," replied my uncle.

By midnight our mining preparations were over; the charge was rammed
into the hole, and the slow match uncoiled along the gallery showed
its end outside the opening.

A spark would now develop the whole of our preparations into activity.

"To-morrow," said the Professor.

I had to be resigned and to wait six long hours.




CHAPTER XLI.

THE GREAT EXPLOSION AND THE RUSH DOWN BELOW


The next day, Thursday, August 27, is a well-remembered date in our
subterranean journey. It never returns to my memory without sending
through me a shudder of horror and a palpitation of the heart. From
that hour we had no further occasion for the exercise of reason, or
judgment, or skill, or contrivance. We were henceforth to be hurled
along, the playthings of the fierce elements of the deep.

At six we were afoot. The moment drew near to clear a way by blasting
through the opposing mass of granite.

I begged for the honour of lighting the fuse. This duty done, I was
to join my companions on the raft, which had not yet been unloaded;
we should then push off as far as we could and avoid the dangers
arising from the explosion, the effects of which were not likely to
be confined to the rock itself.

The fuse was calculated to burn ten minutes before setting fire to
the mine. I therefore had sufficient time to get away to the raft.

I prepared to fulfil my task with some anxiety.

After a hasty meal, my uncle and the hunter embarked whilst I
remained on shore. I was supplied with a lighted lantern to set fire
to the fuse. "Now go," said my uncle, "and return immediately to us."
"Don't be uneasy," I replied. "I will not play by the way." I
immediately proceeded to the mouth of the tunnel. I opened my
lantern. I laid hold of the end of the match. The Professor stood,
chronometer in hand. "Ready?" he cried.

"Ay."

"Fire!"

I instantly plunged the end of the fuse into the lantern. It
spluttered and flamed, and I ran at the top of my speed to the raft.

"Come on board quickly, and let us push off."

Hans, with a vigorous thrust, sent us from the shore. The raft shot
twenty fathoms out to sea.

It was a moment of intense excitement. The Professor was watching the
hand of the chronometer.

"Five minutes more!" he said. "Four! Three!"

My pulse beat half-seconds.

"Two! One! Down, granite rocks; down with you."

What took place at that moment? I believe I did not hear the dull
roar of the explosion. But the rocks suddenly assumed a new
arrangement: they rent asunder like a curtain. I saw a bottomless pit
open on the shore. The sea, lashed into sudden fury, rose up in an
enormous billow, on the ridge of which the unhappy raft was uplifted
bodily in the air with all its crew and cargo.

We all three fell down flat. In less than a second we were in deep,
unfathomable darkness. Then I felt as if not only myself but the raft
also had no support beneath. I thought it was sinking; but it was not
so. I wanted to speak to my uncle, but the roaring of the waves
prevented him from hearing even the sound of my voice.

In spite of darkness, noise, astonishment, and terror, I then
understood what had taken place.

On the other side of the blown-up rock was an abyss. The explosion
had caused a kind of earthquake in this fissured and abysmal region;
a great gulf had opened; and the sea, now changed into a torrent, was
hurrying us along into it.

I gave myself up for lost.

An hour passed away--two hours, perhaps--I cannot tell. We clutched
each other fast, to save ourselves from being thrown off the raft. We
felt violent shocks whenever we were borne heavily against the craggy
projections. Yet these shocks were not very frequent, from which I
concluded that the gully was widening. It was no doubt the same road
that Saknussemm had taken; but instead of walking peaceably down it,
as he had done, we were carrying a whole sea along with us.

These ideas, it will be understood, presented themselves to my mind
in a vague and undetermined form. I had difficulty in associating any
ideas together during this headlong race, which seemed like a
vertical descent. To judge by the air which was whistling past me and
made a whizzing in my ears, we were moving faster than the fastest
express trains. To light a torch under these' conditions would have
been impossible; and our last electric apparatus had been shattered
by the force of the explosion.

I was therefore much surprised to see a clear light shining near me.
It lighted up the calm and unmoved countenance of Hans. The skilful
huntsman had succeeded in lighting the lantern; and although it
flickered so much as to threaten to go out, it threw a fitful light
across the awful darkness.

I was right in my supposition. It was a wide gallery. The dim light
could not show us both its walls at once. The fall of the waters
which were carrying us away exceeded that of the swiftest rapids in
American rivers. Its surface seemed composed of a sheaf of arrows
hurled with inconceivable force; I cannot convey my impressions by a
better comparison. The raft, occasionally seized by an eddy, spun
round as it still flew along. When it approached the walls of the
gallery I threw on them the light of the lantern, and I could judge
somewhat of the velocity of our speed by noticing how the jagged
projections of the rocks spun into endless ribbons and bands, so that
we seemed confined within a network of shifting lines. I supposed we
were running at the rate of thirty leagues an hour.

My uncle and I gazed on each other with haggard eyes, clinging to the
stump of the mast, which had snapped asunder at the first shock of
our great catastrophe. We kept our backs to the wind, not to be
stifled by the rapidity of a movement which no human power could
check.

Hours passed away. No change in our situation; but a discovery came
to complicate matters and make them worse.

In seeking to put our cargo into somewhat better order, I found that
the greater part of the articles embarked had disappeared at the
moment of the explosion, when the sea broke in upon us with such
violence. I wanted to know exactly what we had saved, and with the
lantern in my hand I began my examination. Of our instruments none
were saved but the compass and the chronometer; our stock of ropes
and ladders was reduced to the bit of cord rolled round the stump of
the mast! Not a spade, not a pickaxe, not a hammer was left us; and,
irreparable disaster! we had only one day's provisions left.

I searched every nook and corner, every crack and cranny in the raft.
There was nothing. Our provisions were reduced to one bit of salt
meat and a few biscuits.

I stared at our failing supplies stupidly. I refused to take in the
gravity of our loss. And yet what was the use of troubling myself. If
we had had provisions enough for months, how could we get out of the
abyss into which we were being hurled by an irresistible torrent? Why
should we fear the horrors of famine, when death was swooping down
upon us in a multitude of other forms? Would there be time left to
die of starvation?

Yet by an inexplicable play of the imagination I forgot my present
dangers, to contemplate the threatening future. Was there any chance
of escaping from the fury of this impetuous torrent, and of returning
to the surface of the globe? I could not form the slightest
conjecture how or when. But one chance in a thousand, or ten
thousand, is still a chance; whilst death from starvation would leave
us not the smallest hope in the world.

The thought came into my mind to declare the whole truth to my uncle,
to show him the dreadful straits to which we were reduced, and to
calculate how long we might yet expect to live. But I had the courage
to preserve silence. I wished to leave him cool and self-possessed.

At that moment the light from our lantern began to sink by little and
little, and then went out entirely. The wick had burnt itself out.
Black night reigned again; and there was no hope left of being able
to dissipate the palpable darkness. We had yet a torch left, but we
could not have kept it alight. Then, like a child, I closed my eyes
firmly, not to see the darkness.

After a considerable lapse of time our speed redoubled. I could
perceive it by the sharpness of the currents that blew past my face.
The descent became steeper. I believe we were no longer sliding, but
falling down. I had an impression that we were dropping vertically.
My uncle's hand, and the vigorous arm of Hans, held me fast.

Suddenly, after a space of time that I could not measure, I felt a
shock. The raft had not struck against any hard resistance, but had
suddenly been checked in its fall. A waterspout, an immense liquid
column, was beating upon the surface of the waters. I was
suffocating! I was drowning!

But this sudden flood was not of long duration. In a few seconds I
found myself in the air again, which I inhaled with all the force of
my lungs. My uncle and Hans were still holding me fast by the arms;
and the raft was still carrying us.



CHAPTER XLII.

HEADLONG SPEED UPWARD THROUGH THE HORRORS OF DARKNESS


It might have been, as I guessed, about ten at night. The first of my
senses which came into play after this last bout was that of hearing.
All at once I could hear; and it was a real exercise of the sense of
hearing. I could hear the silence in the gallery after the din which
for hours had stunned me. At last these words of my uncle's came to
me like a vague murmuring:

"We are going up."

"What do you mean?" I cried.

"Yes, we are going up--up!"

I stretched out my arm. I touched the wall, and drew back my hand
bleeding. We were ascending with extreme rapidity.

"The torch! The torch!" cried the Professor.

Not without difficulty Hans succeeded in lighting the torch; and the
flame, preserving its upward tendency, threw enough light to show us
what kind of a place we were in.

"Just as I thought," said the Professor "We are in a tunnel not
four-and-twenty feet in diameter. The water had reached the bottom of
the gulf. It is now rising to its level, and carrying us with it."

"Where to?"

"I cannot tell; but we must be ready for anything. We are mounting at
a speed which seems to me of fourteen feet in a second, or ten miles
an hour. At this rate we shall get on."

"Yes, if nothing stops us; if this well has an aperture. But suppose
it to be stopped. If the air is condensed by the pressure of this
column of water we shall be crushed."

"Axel," replied the Professor with perfect coolness, "our situation
is almost desperate; but there are some chances of deliverance, and
it is these that I am considering. If at every instant we may perish,
so at every instant we may be saved. Let us then be prepared to seize
upon the smallest advantage."

"But what shall we do now?"

"Recruit our strength by eating."

At these words I fixed a haggard eye upon my uncle. That which I had
been so unwilling to confess at last had to be told.

"Eat, did you say?"

"Yes, at once."

The Professor added a few words in Danish, but Hans shook his head
mournfully.

"What!" cried my uncle. "Have we lost our provisions?"

"Yes; here is all we have left; one bit of salt meat for the three."

My uncle stared at me as if he could not understand.

"Well," said I, "do you think we have any chance of being saved?"

My question was unanswered.

An hour passed away. I began to feel the pangs of a violent hunger.
My companions were suffering too, and not one of us dared touch this
wretched remnant of our goodly store.

But now we were mounting up with excessive speed. Sometimes the air
would cut our breath short, as is experienced by aeronauts ascending
too rapidly. But whilst they suffer from cold in proportion to their
rise, we were beginning to feel a contrary effect. The heat was
increasing in a manner to cause us the most fearful anxiety, and
certainly the temperature was at this moment at the height of 100
Fahr.

What could be the meaning of such a change? Up to this time facts had
supported the theories of Davy and of Liedenbrock; until now
particular conditions of non-conducting rocks, electricity and
magnetism, had tempered the laws of nature, giving us only a
moderately warm climate, for the theory of a central fire remained in
my estimation the only one that was true and explicable. Were we then
turning back to where the phenomena of central heat ruled in all
their rigour and would reduce the most refractory rocks to the state
of a molten liquid? I feared this, and said to the Professor:

"If we are neither drowned, nor shattered to pieces, nor starved to
death, there is still the chance that we may be burned alive and
reduced to ashes."

At this he shrugged his shoulders and returned to his thoughts.

Another hour passed, and, except some slight increase in the
temperature, nothing new had happened.

"Come," said he, "we must determine upon something."

"Determine on what?" said I.

"Yes, we must recruit our strength by carefully rationing ourselves,
and so prolong our existence by a few hours. But we shall be reduced
to very great weakness at last."

"And our last hour is not far off."

"Well, if there is a chance of safety, if a moment for active
exertion presents itself, where should we find the required strength
if we allowed ourselves to be enfeebled by hunger?"

"Well, uncle, when this bit of meat has been devoured what shall we
have left?"

"Nothing, Axel, nothing at all. But will it do you any more good to
devour it with your eyes than with your teeth? Your reasoning has in
it neither sense nor energy."

"Then don't you despair?" I cried irritably.

"No, certainly not," was the Professor's firm reply.

"What! do you think there is any chance of safety left?"

"Yes, I do; as long as the heart beats, as long as body and soul keep
together, I cannot admit that any creature endowed with a will has
need to despair of life."

Resolute words these! The man who could speak so, under such
circumstances, was of no ordinary type.

"Finally, what do you mean to do?" I asked.

"Eat what is left to the last crumb, and recruit our fading strength.
This meal will be our last, perhaps: so let it be! But at any rate we
shall once more be men, and not exhausted, empty bags."

"Well, let us consume it then," I cried.

My uncle took the piece of meat and the few biscuits which had
escaped from the general destruction. He divided them into three
equal portions and gave one to each. This made about a pound of
nourishment for each. The Professor ate his greedily, with a kind of
feverish rage. I ate without pleasure, almost with disgust; Hans
quietly, moderately, masticating his small mouthfuls without any
noise, and relishing them with the calmness of a man above all
anxiety about the future. By diligent search he had found a flask of
Hollands; he offered it to us each in turn, and this generous
beverage cheered us up slightly.

"_Fortrfflig,_" said Hans, drinking in his turn.

"Excellent," replied my uncle.

A glimpse of hope had returned, although without cause. But our last
meal was over, and it was now five in the morning.

Man is so constituted that health is a purely negative state. Hunger
once satisfied, it is difficult for a man to imagine the horrors of
starvation; they cannot be understood without being felt.

Therefore it was that after our long fast these few mouthfuls of meat
and biscuit made us triumph over our past agonies.

But as soon as the meal was done, we each of us fell deep into
thought. What was Hans thinking of--that man of the far West, but
who seemed ruled by the fatalist doctrines of the East?

As for me, my thoughts were made up of remembrances, and they carried
me up to the surface of the globe of which I ought never to have
taken leave. The house in the Knigstrasse, my poor dear Gruben,
that kind soul Martha, flitted like visions before my eyes, and in
the dismal moanings which from time to time reached my ears I thought
I could distinguish the roar of the traffic of the great cities upon
earth.

My uncle still had his eye upon his work. Torch in hand, he tried to
gather some idea of our situation from the observation of the strata.
This calculation could, at best, be but a vague approximation; but a
learned man is always a philosopher when he succeeds in remaining
cool, and assuredly Professor Liedenbrock possessed this quality to a
surprising degree.

I could hear him murmuring geological terms. I could understand them,
and in spite of myself I felt interested in this last geological
study.

"Eruptive granite," he was saying. "We are still in the primitive
period. But we are going up, up, higher still. Who can tell?"

Ah! who can tell? With his hand he was examining the perpendicular
wall, and in a few more minutes he continued:

"This is gneiss! here is mica schist! Ah! presently we shall come to
the transition period, and then--"

What did the Professor mean? Could he be trying to measure the
thickness of the crust of the earth that lay between us and the world
above? Had he any means of making this calculation? No, he had not
the aneroid, and no guessing could supply its place.

Still the temperature kept rising, and I felt myself steeped in a
broiling atmosphere. I could only compare it to the heat of a furnace
at the moment when the molten metal is running into the mould.
Gradually we had been obliged to throw aside our coats and
waistcoats, the lightest covering became uncomfortable and even
painful.

"Are we rising into a fiery furnace?" I cried at one moment when the
heat was redoubling.

"No," replied my uncle, "that is impossible--quite impossible!"

"Yet," I answered, feeling the wall, "this well is burning hot."

At the same moment, touching the water, I had to withdraw my hand in
haste.

"The water is scalding," I cried.

This time the Professor's only answer was an angry gesture.

Then an unconquerable terror seized upon me, from which I could no
longer get free. I felt that a catastrophe was approaching before
which the boldest spirit must quail. A dim, vague notion laid hold of
my mind, but which was fast hardening into certainty. I tried to
repel it, but it would return. I dared not express it in plain terms.
Yet a few involuntary observations confirmed me in my view. By the
flickering light of the torch I could distinguish contortions in the
granite beds; a phenomenon was unfolding in which electricity would
play the principal part; then this unbearable heat, this boiling
water! I consulted the compass.

The compass had lost its properties! it had ceased to act properly!



CHAPTER XLIII.

SHOT OUT OF A VOLCANO AT LAST!


Yes: our compass was no longer a guide; the needle flew from pole to
pole with a kind of frenzied impulse; it ran round the dial, and spun
hither and thither as if it were giddy or intoxicated.

I knew quite well that according to the best received theories the
mineral covering of the globe is never at absolute rest; the changes
brought about by the chemical decomposition of its component parts,
the agitation caused by great liquid torrents, and the magnetic
currents, are continually tending to disturb it--even when living
beings upon its surface may fancy that all is quiet below. A
phenomenon of this kind would not have greatly alarmed me, or at any
rate it would not have given rise to dreadful apprehensions.

But other facts, other circumstances, of a peculiar nature, came to
reveal to me by degrees the true state of the case. There came
incessant and continuous explosions. I could only compare them to the
loud rattle of a long train of chariots driven at full speed over the
stones, or a roar of unintermitting thunder.

Then the disordered compass, thrown out of gear by the electric
currents, confirmed me in a growing conviction. The mineral crust of
the globe threatened to burst up, the granite foundations to come
together with a crash, the fissure through which we were helplessly
driven would be filled up, the void would be full of crushed
fragments of rock, and we poor wretched mortals were to be buried and
annihilated in this dreadful consummation.

"My uncle," I cried, "we are lost now, utterly lost!"

"What are you in a fright about now?" was the calm rejoinder. "What
is the matter with you?"

"The matter? Look at those quaking walls! look at those shivering
rocks. Don't you feel the burning heat? Don't you see how the water
boils and bubbles? Are you blind to the dense vapours and steam
growing thicker and denser every minute? See this agitated compass
needle. It is an earthquake that is threatening us."

My undaunted uncle calmly shook his head.

"Do you think," said he, "an earthquake is coming?"

"I do."

"Well, I think you are mistaken."

"What! don't you recognise the symptoms?"

"Of an earthquake? no! I am looking out for something better."

"What can you mean? Explain?"

"It is an eruption, Axel."

"An eruption! Do you mean to affirm that we are running up the shaft
of a volcano?"

"I believe we are," said the indomitable Professor with an air of
perfect self-possession; "and it is the best thing that could
possibly happen to us under our circumstances."

The best thing! Was my uncle stark mad? What did the man mean? and
what was the use of saying facetious things at a time like this?

"What!" I shouted. "Are we being taken up in an eruption? Our fate
has flung us here among burning lavas, molten rocks, boiling waters,
and all kinds of volcanic matter; we are going to be pitched out,
expelled, tossed up, vomited, spit out high into the air, along with
fragments of rock, showers of ashes and scoria, in the midst of a
towering rush of smoke and flames; and it is the best thing that
could happen to us!"

"Yes," replied the Professor, eyeing me over his spectacles, "I don't
see any other way of reaching the surface of the earth."

I pass rapidly over the thousand ideas which passed through my mind.
My uncle was right, undoubtedly right; and never had he seemed to me
more daring and more confirmed in his notions than at this moment
when he was calmly contemplating the chances of being shot out of a
volcano!

In the meantime up we went; the night passed away in continual
ascent; the din and uproar around us became more and more
intensified; I was stifled and stunned; I thought my last hour was
approaching; and yet imagination is such a strong thing that even in
this supreme hour I was occupied with strange and almost childish
speculations. But I was the victim, not the master, of my own
thoughts.

It was very evident that we were being hurried upward upon the crest
of a wave of eruption; beneath our raft were boiling waters, and
under these the more sluggish lava was working its way up in a heated
mass, together with shoals of fragments of rock which, when they
arrived at the crater, would be dispersed in all directions high and
low. We were imprisoned in the shaft or chimney of some volcano.
There was no room to doubt of that.

But this time, instead of Snfell, an extinct volcano, we were inside
one in full activity. I wondered, therefore, where could this
mountain be, and in what part of the world we were to be shot out.

I made no doubt but that it would be in some northern region. Before
its disorders set in, the needle had never deviated from that
direction. From Cape Saknussemm we had been carried due north for
hundreds of leagues. Were we under Iceland again? Were we destined to
be thrown up out of Hecla, or by which of the seven other fiery
craters in that island? Within a radius of five hundred leagues to
the west I remembered under this parallel of latitude only the
imperfectly known volcanoes of the north-east coast of America. To
the east there was only one in the 80th degree of north latitude, the
Esk in Jan Mayen Island, not far from Spitzbergen! Certainly there
was no lack of craters, and there were some capacious enough to throw
out a whole army! But I wanted to know which of them was to serve us
for an exit from the inner world.

Towards morning the ascending movement became accelerated. If the
heat increased, instead of diminishing, as we approached nearer to
the surface of the globe, this effect was due to local causes alone,
and those volcanic. The manner of our locomotion left no doubt in my
mind. An enormous force, a force of hundreds of atmospheres,
generated by the extreme pressure of confined vapours, was driving us
irresistibly forward. But to what numberless dangers it exposed us!

Soon lurid lights began to penetrate the vertical gallery which
widened as we went up. Right and left I could see deep channels, like
huge tunnels, out of which escaped dense volumes of smoke; tongues of
fire lapped the walls, which crackled and sputtered under the intense
heat.

"See, see, my uncle!" I cried.

"Well, those are only sulphureous flames and vapours, which one must
expect to see in an eruption. They are quite natural."

"But suppose they should wrap us round."

"But they won't wrap us round."

"But we shall be stifled."

"We shall not be stifled at all. The gallery is widening, and if it
becomes necessary, we shall abandon the raft, and creep into a
crevice."

"But the water--the rising water?"

"There is no more water, Axel; only a lava paste, which is bearing us
up on its surface to the top of the crater."

The liquid column had indeed disappeared, to give place to dense and
still boiling eruptive matter of all kinds. The temperature was
becoming unbearable. A thermometer exposed to this atmosphere would
have marked 150. The perspiration streamed from my body. But for the
rapidity of our ascent we should have been suffocated.

But the Professor gave up his idea of abandoning the raft, and it was
well he did. However roughly joined together, those planks afforded
us a firmer support than we could have found anywhere else.

About eight in the morning a new incident occurred. The upward
movement ceased. The raft lay motionless.

"What is this?" I asked, shaken by this sudden stoppage as if by a
shock.

"It is a halt," replied my uncle.

"Is the eruption checked?" I asked.

"I hope not."

I rose, and tried to look around me. Perhaps the raft itself, stopped
in its course by a projection, was staying the volcanic torrent. If
this were the case we should have to release it as soon as possible.

But it was not so. The blast of ashes, scorix, and rubbish had ceased
to rise.

"Has the eruption stopped?" I cried.

"Ah!" said my uncle between his clenched teeth, "you are afraid. But
don't alarm yourself--this lull cannot last long. It has lasted now
five minutes, and in a short time we shall resume our journey to the
mouth of the crater."

As he spoke, the Professor continued to consult his chronometer, and
he was again right in his prognostications. The raft was soon hurried
and driven forward with a rapid but irregular movement, which lasted
about ten minutes, and then stopped again.

"Very good," said my uncle; "in ten minutes more we shall be off
again, for our present business lies with an intermittent volcano. It
gives us time now and then to take breath."

This was perfectly true. When the ten minutes were over we started
off again with renewed and increased speed. We were obliged to lay
fast hold of the planks of the raft, not to be thrown off. Then again
the paroxysm was over.

I have since reflected upon this singular phenomenon without being
able to explain it. At any rate it was clear that we were not in the
main shaft of the volcano, but in a lateral gallery where there were
felt recurrent tunes of reaction.

How often this operation was repeated I cannot say. All I know is,
that at each fresh impulse we were hurled forward with a greatly
increased force, and we seemed as if we were mere projectiles. During
the short halts we were stifled with the heat; whilst we were being
projected forward the hot air almost stopped my breath. I thought for
a moment how delightful it would be to find myself carried suddenly
into the arctic regions, with a cold 30 below the freezing point. My
overheated brain conjured up visions of white plains of cool snow,
where I might roll and allay my feverish heat. Little by little my
brain, weakened by so many constantly repeated shocks, seemed to be
giving way altogether. But for the strong arm of Hans I should more
than once have had my head broken against the granite roof of our
burning dungeon.

I have therefore no exact recollection of what took place during the
following hours. I have a confused impression left of continuous
explosions, loud detonations, a general shaking of the rocks all
around us, and of a spinning movement with which our raft was once
whirled helplessly round. It rocked upon the lava torrent, amidst a
dense fall of ashes. Snorting flames darted their fiery tongues at
us. There were wild, fierce puffs of stormy wind from below,
resembling the blasts of vast iron furnaces blowing all at one time;
and I caught a glimpse of the figure of Hans lighted up by the fire;
and all the feeling I had left was just what I imagine must be the
feeling of an unhappy criminal doomed to be blown away alive from the
mouth of a cannon, just before the trigger is pulled, and the flying
limbs and rags of flesh and skin fill the quivering air and spatter
the blood-stained ground.



CHAPTER XLIV.

SUNNY LANDS IN THE BLUE MEDITERRANEAN


When I opened my eyes again I felt myself grasped by the belt with
the strong hand of our guide. With the other arm he supported my
uncle. I was not seriously hurt, but I was shaken and bruised and
battered all over. I found myself lying on the sloping side of a
mountain only two yards from a gaping gulf, which would have
swallowed me up had I leaned at all that way. Hans had saved me from
death whilst I lay rolling on the edge of the crater.

"Where are we?" asked my uncle irascibly, as if he felt much injured
by being landed upon the earth again.

The hunter shook his head in token of complete ignorance.

"Is it Iceland?" I asked.

"_Nej,_" replied Hans.

"What! Not Iceland?" cried the Professor.

"Hans must be mistaken," I said, raising myself up.

This was our final surprise after all the astonishing events of our
wonderful journey. I expected to see a white cone covered with the
eternal snow of ages rising from the midst of the barren deserts of
the icy north, faintly lighted with the pale rays of the arctic sun,
far away in the highest latitudes known; but contrary to all our
expectations, my uncle, the Icelander, and myself were sitting
half-way down a mountain baked under the burning rays of a southern
sun, which was blistering us with the heat, and blinding us with the
fierce light of his nearly vertical rays.

I could not believe my own eyes; but the heated air and the sensation
of burning left me no room for doubt. We had come out of the crater
half naked, and the radiant orb to which we had been strangers for
two months was lavishing upon us out of his blazing splendours more
of his light and heat than we were able to receive with comfort.

When my eyes had become accustomed to the bright light to which they
had been so long strangers, I began to use them to set my imagination
right. At least I would have it to be Spitzbergen, and I was in no
humour to give up this notion.

The Professor was the first to speak, and said:

"Well, this is not much like Iceland."

"But is it Jan Mayen?" I asked.

"Nor that either," he answered. "This is no northern mountain; here
are no granite peaks capped with snow. Look, Axel, look!"

Above our heads, at a height of five hundred feet or more, we saw the
crater of a volcano, through which, at intervals of fifteen minutes
or so, there issued with loud explosions lofty columns of fire,
mingled with pumice stones, ashes, and flowing lava. I could feel the
heaving of the mountain, which seemed to breathe like a huge whale,
and puff out fire and wind from its vast blowholes. Beneath, down a
pretty steep declivity, ran streams of lava for eight or nine hundred
feet, giving the mountain a height of about 1,300 or 1,400 feet. But
the base of the mountain was hidden in a perfect bower of rich
verdure, amongst which I was able to distinguish the olive, the fig,
and vines, covered with their luscious purple bunches.

I was forced to confess that there was nothing arctic here.

When the eye passed beyond these green surroundings it rested on a
wide, blue expanse of sea or lake, which appeared to enclose this
enchanting island, within a compass of only a few leagues. Eastward
lay a pretty little white seaport town or village, with a few houses
scattered around it, and in the harbour of which a few vessels of
peculiar rig were gently swayed by the softly swelling waves. Beyond
it, groups of islets rose from the smooth, blue waters, but in such
numbers that they seemed to dot the sea like a shoal. To the west
distant coasts lined the dim horizon, on some rose blue mountains of
smooth, undulating forms; on a more distant coast arose a prodigious
cone crowned on its summit with a snowy plume of white cloud. To the
northward lay spread a vast sheet of water, sparkling and dancing
under the hot, bright rays, the uniformity broken here and there by
the topmast of a gallant ship appearing above the horizon, or a
swelling sail moving slowly before the wind.

This unforeseen spectacle was most charming to eyes long used to
underground darkness.

"Where are we? Where are we?" I asked faintly.

Hans closed his eyes with lazy indifference. What did it matter to
him? My uncle looked round with dumb surprise.

"Well, whatever mountain this may be," he said at last, "it is very
hot here. The explosions are going on still, and I don't think it
would look well to have come out by an eruption, and then to get our
heads broken by bits of falling rock. Let us get down. Then we shall
know better what we are about. Besides, I am starving, and parching
with thirst."

Decidedly the Professor was not given to contemplation. For my part,
I could for another hour or two have forgotten my hunger and my
fatigue to enjoy the lovely scene before me; but I had to follow my
companions.

The slope of the volcano was in many places of great steepness. We
slid down screes of ashes, carefully avoiding the lava streams which
glided sluggishly by us like fiery serpents. As we went I chattered
and asked all sorts of questions as to our whereabouts, for I was too
much excited not to talk a great deal.

"We are in Asia," I cried, "on the coasts of India, in the Malay
Islands, or in Oceania. We have passed through half the globe, and
come out nearly at the antipodes."

"But the compass?" said my uncle.

"Ay, the compass!" I said, greatly puzzled. "According to the compass
we have gone northward."

"Has it lied?"

"Surely not. Could it lie?"

"Unless, indeed, this is the North Pole!"

"Oh, no, it is not the Pole; but--"

Well, here was something that baffled us completely. I could not tell
what to say.

But now we were coming into that delightful greenery, and I was
suffering greatly from hunger and thirst. Happily, after two hours'
walking, a charming country lay open before us, covered with olive
trees, pomegranate trees, and delicious vines, all of which seemed to
belong to anybody who pleased to claim them. Besides, in our state of
destitution and famine we were not likely to be particular. Oh, the
inexpressible pleasure of pressing those cool, sweet fruits to our
lips, and eating grapes by mouthfuls off the rich, full bunches! Not
far off, in the grass, under the delicious shade of the trees, I
discovered a spring of fresh, cool water, in which we luxuriously
bathed our faces, hands, and feet.

Whilst we were thus enjoying the sweets of repose a child appeared
out of a grove of olive trees.

"Ah!" I cried, "here is an inhabitant of this happy land!"

It was but a poor boy, miserably ill-clad, a sufferer from poverty,
and our aspect seemed to alarm him a great deal; in fact, only half
clothed, with ragged hair and beards, we were a suspicious-looking
party; and if the people of the country knew anything about thieves,
we were very likely to frighten them.

Just as the poor little wretch was going to take to his heels, Hans
caught hold of him, and brought him to us, kicking and struggling.

My uncle began to encourage him as well as he could, and said to him
in good German:

"_Was heiszt diesen Berg, mein Knablein? Sage mir geschwind!_"

("What is this mountain called, my little friend?")

The child made no answer.

"Very well," said my uncle. "I infer that we are not in Germany."

He put the same question in English.

We got no forwarder. I was a good deal puzzled.

"Is the child dumb?" cried the Professor, who, proud of his knowledge
of many languages, now tried French: "_Comment appellet-on cette
montagne, mon enfant?_"

Silence still.

"Now let us try Italian," said my uncle; and he said:

"_Dove noi siamo?_"

"Yes, where are we?" I impatiently repeated.

But there was no answer still.

"Will you speak when you are told?" exclaimed my uncle, shaking the
urchin by the ears. "_Come si noma questa isola?_"

"STROMBOLI," replied the little herdboy, slipping out of Hans' hands,
and scudding into the plain across the olive trees.

We were hardly thinking of that. Stromboli! What an effect this
unexpected name produced upon my mind! We were in the midst of the
Mediterranean Sea, on an island of the olian archipelago, in the
ancient Strongyle, where olus kept the winds and the storms chained
up, to be let loose at his will. And those distant blue mountains in
the east were the mountains of Calabria. And that threatening volcano
far away in the south was the fierce Etna.

"Stromboli, Stromboli!" I repeated.

My uncle kept time to my exclamations with hands and feet, as well as
with words. We seemed to be chanting in chorus!

What a journey we had accomplished! How marvellous! Having entered by
one volcano, we had issued out of another more than two thousand
miles from Snfell and from that barren, far-away Iceland! The
strange chances of our expedition had carried us into the heart of
the fairest region in the world. We had exchanged the bleak regions
of perpetual snow and of impenetrable barriers of ice for those of
brightness and 'the rich hues of all glorious things.' We had left
over our heads the murky sky and cold fogs of the frigid zone to
revel under the azure sky of Italy!

After our delicious repast of fruits and cold, clear water we set off
again to reach the port of Stromboli. It would not have been wise to
tell how we came there. The superstitious Italians would have set us
down for fire-devils vomited out of hell; so we presented ourselves
in the humble guise of shipwrecked mariners. It was not so glorious,
but it was safer.

On my way I could hear my uncle murmuring: "But the compass! that
compass! It pointed due north. How are we to explain that fact?"

"My opinion is," I replied disdainfully, "that it is best not to
explain it. That is the easiest way to shelve the difficulty."

"Indeed, sir! The occupant of a professorial chair at the Johannum
unable to explain the reason of a cosmical phenomenon! Why, it would
be simply disgraceful!"

And as he spoke, my uncle, half undressed, in rags, a perfect
scarecrow, with his leathern belt around him, settling his spectacles
upon his nose and looking learned and imposing, was himself again,
the terrible German professor of mineralogy.

One hour after we had left the grove of olives, we arrived at the
little port of San Vicenzo, where Hans claimed his thirteen week's
wages, which was counted out to him with a hearty shaking of hands
all round.

At that moment, if he did not share our natural emotion, at least his
countenance expanded in a manner very unusual with him, and while
with the ends of his fingers he lightly pressed our hands, I believe
he smiled.



CHAPTER XLV.

ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL


Such is the conclusion of a history which I cannot expect everybody
to believe, for some people will believe nothing against the
testimony of their own experience. However, I am indifferent to their
incredulity, and they may believe as much or as little as they please.

The Stromboliotes received us kindly as shipwrecked mariners. They
gave us food and clothing. After waiting forty-eight hours, on the 31
st of August, a small craft took us to Messina, where a few days'
rest completely removed the effect of our fatigues.

On Friday, September the 4th, we embarked on the steamer Volturno,
employed by the French Messageries Imperiales, and in three days more
we were at Marseilles, having no care on our minds except that
abominable deceitful compass, which we had mislaid somewhere and
could not now examine; but its inexplicable behaviour exercised my
mind fearfully. On the 9th of September, in the evening, we arrived
at Hamburg.

I cannot describe to you the astonishment of Martha or the joy of
Gruben.

"Now you are a hero, Axel," said to me my blushing _fiance,_ my
betrothed, "you will not leave me again!"

I looked tenderly upon her, and she smiled through her tears.

How can I describe the extraordinary sensation produced by the return
of Professor Liedenbrock? Thanks to Martha's ineradicable tattling,
the news that the Professor had gone to discover a way to the centre
of the earth had spread over the whole civilised world. People
refused to believe it, and when they saw him they would not believe
him any the more. Still, the appearance of Hans, and sundry pieces of
intelligence derived from Iceland, tended to shake the confidence of
the unbelievers.

Then my uncle became a great man, and I was now the nephew of a great
man--which is not a privilege to be despised.

Hamburg gave a grand fete in our honour. A public audience was given
to the Professor at the Johannum, at which he told all about our
expedition, with only one omission, the unexplained and inexplicable
behaviour of our compass. On the same day, with much state, he
deposited in the archives of the city the now famous document of
Saknussemm, and expressed his regret that circumstances over which he
had no control had prevented him from following to the very centre of
the earth the track of the learned Icelander. He was modest
notwithstanding his glory, and he was all the more famous for his
humility.

So much honour could not but excite envy. There were those who envied
him his fame; and as his theories, resting upon known facts, were in
opposition to the systems of science upon the question of the central
fire, he sustained with his pen and by his voice remarkable
discussions with the learned of every country.

For my part I cannot agree with his theory of gradual cooling: in
spite of what I have seen and felt, I believe, and always shall
believe, in the central heat. But I admit that certain circumstances
not yet sufficiently understood may tend to modify in places the
action of natural phenomena.

While these questions were being debated with great animation, my
uncle met with a real sorrow. Our faithful Hans, in spite of our
entreaties, had left Hamburg; the man to whom we owed all our success
and our lives too would not suffer us to reward him as we could have
wished. He was seized with the mal de pays, a complaint for which we
have not even a name in English.

"_Farval,_" said he one day; and with that simple word he left us and
sailed for Rejkiavik, which he reached in safety.

We were strongly attached to our brave eider-down hunter; though far
away in the remotest north, he will never be forgotten by those whose
lives he protected, and certainly I shall not fail to endeavour to
see him once more before I die.

To conclude, I have to add that this 'Journey into the Interior of
the Earth' created a wonderful sensation in the world. It was
translated into all civilised languages. The leading newspapers
extracted the most interesting passages, which were commented upon,
picked to pieces, discussed, attacked, and defended with equal
enthusiasm and determination, both by believers and sceptics. Rare
privilege! my uncle enjoyed during his lifetime the glory he had
deservedly won; and he may even boast the distinguished honour of an
offer from Mr. Barnum, to exhibit him on most advantageous terms in
all the principal cities in the United States!

But there was one 'dead fly' amidst all this glory and honour; one
fact, one incident, of the journey remained a mystery. Now to a man
eminent for his learning, an unexplained phenomenon is an unbearable
hardship. Well! it was yet reserved for my uncle to be completely
happy.

One day, while arranging a collection of minerals in his cabinet, I
noticed in a corner this unhappy compass, which we had long lost
sight of; I opened it, and began to watch it.

It had been in that corner for six months, little mindful of the
trouble it was giving.

Suddenly, to my intense astonishment, I noticed a strange fact, and I
uttered a cry of surprise.

"What is the matter?" my uncle asked.

"That compass!"

"Well?"

"See, its poles are reversed!"

"Reversed?"

"Yes, they point the wrong way."

My uncle looked, he compared, and the house shook with his triumphant
leap of exultation.

A light broke in upon his spirit and mine.

"See there," he cried, as soon as he was able to speak. "After our
arrival at Cape Saknussemm the north pole of the needle of this
confounded compass began to point south instead of north."

"Evidently!"

"Here, then, is the explanation of our mistake. But what phenomenon
could have caused this reversal of the poles?"

"The reason is evident, uncle."

"Tell me, then, Axel."

"During the electric storm on the Liedenbrock sea, that ball of fire,
which magnetised all the iron on board, reversed the poles of our
magnet!"

"Aha! aha!" shouted the Professor with a loud laugh. "So it was just
an electric joke!"

From that day forth the Professor was the most glorious of savants,
and I was the happiest of men; for my pretty Virlandaise, resigning
her place as ward, took her position in the old house on the
Knigstrasse in the double capacity of niece to my uncle and wife to
a certain happy youth. What is the need of adding that the
illustrious Otto Liedenbrock, corresponding member of all the
scientific, geographical, and mineralogical societies of all the
civilised world, was now her uncle and mine?








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Journey to the Interior of the Earth, by
Jules Verne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOURNEY TO THE INTERIOR ***

***** This file should be named 3748-8.txt or 3748-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/4/3748/

Produced by Norman M. Wolcott.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Charing Cross Mystery, by J. S. Fletcher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Charing Cross Mystery

Author: J. S. Fletcher

Release Date: July 10, 2019 [EBook #59893]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHARING CROSS MYSTERY ***




Produced by Al Haines









THE CHARING CROSS MYSTERY


BY

J. S. FLETCHER



HERBERT JENKINS LIMITED

3 YORK STREET, LONDON, S.W.1




A HERBERT JENKINS' BOOK



Sixth printing completing 46,825 copies



Printed in Great Britain by Butler & Tanner Ltd., Frome and London




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I.  THE LAST TRAIN EAST
    II.  WHOSE PORTRAIT IS THIS?
   III.  THE POTENTIAL FORTUNE
    IV.  THE DIAMOND NECKLACE
     V.  THE POLICE RETURN
    VI.  SAMPLES OF INK
   VII.  BLACK VELVET
  VIII.  FLIGWOOD'S RENTS
    IX.  THE MEDICINE BOTTLE
     X.  THE MYSTERIOUS  VISITOR
    XI.  LADY RIVERSREADE
   XII.  _ALIAS_ MADAME LISTORELLE
  XIII.  WHO WAS SHE?
   XIV.  IS IT BLACKMAIL?
    XV.  REVELATIONS
   XVI.  STILL MORE
  XVII.  THE TORN LABELS
 XVIII.  THE TELEGRAM
   XIX.  THE LONDON ROAD
    XX.  CONVERGING TRACKS
   XXI.  THE ORDER IN WRITING
  XXII.  THE HIGHLY-RESPECTABLE SOLICITOR
 XXIII.  THE LANDLADY OF LITTLE SMITH STREET
  XXIV.  THE HOUSE IN THE YARD
   XXV.  DEAD!
  XXVI.  WATERLOO
 XXVII.  THE ASSURANCE




THE CHARING CROSS MYSTERY


CHAPTER I

THE LAST TRAIN EAST

Hetherwick had dined that evening with friends who lived in Cadogan
Gardens, and had stayed so late in conversation with his host that
midnight had come before he left and set out for his bachelor chambers
in the Temple; it was, indeed, by the fraction of a second that he
caught the last east-bound train at Sloane Square.  The train was
almost destitute of passengers; the car which he himself entered, a
first-class smoking compartment, was otherwise empty; no one came into
it when the train reached Victoria.  But at St. James's Park two men
got in, and seated themselves opposite to Hetherwick.

Now Hetherwick was a young barrister, going in for criminal practice,
in whom the observant faculty was deeply implanted; it was natural to
him to watch and to speculate on anything he saw.  Because of this, and
perhaps because he had just then nothing else to think about, he sat
observing the new-comers; he found interest, amusement, and not a
little profit in this sort of thing, and in trying to decide whether a
given man was this, that, or something else.

Of the two men thus under inspection, the elder was a big, burly,
fresh-coloured man of apparently sixty to sixty-five years of age.  His
closely cropped silvery hair, his smartly trained grey moustache, his
keen blue eyes and generally alert and vivacious appearance, made
Hetherwick think that he was or had been in some way or other connected
with the army; this impression was heightened by an erect carriage,
square-set shoulders and something that suggested a long and close
acquaintance with the methods of the drill-yard and the parade ground.
Perhaps, thought Hetherwick, he was a retired non-commissioned officer,
a regimental sergeant-major, or something of that sort; this idea,
again, was strengthened by the fact that the man carried a handsome
walking-cane, the head of which, either of gold or of silver-gilt, was
fashioned like a crown.  There was something military, too, about the
cut of his clothes; he was a smartly dressed man, from his silk hat,
new and glossy and worn a little rakishly on the right side of his
head, to his highly polished boots.  A well-preserved, cheery-looking,
good-humoured sort of person, this, decided Hetherwick, and apparently
well satisfied with himself and full of the enjoyment of life, and
likely, from all outward sight, to make old bones.

The other man came into a different category.  The difference began
with his clothes, which, if not exactly shabby, were semi-shabby, much
worn, ill-kept and badly put on: he was evidently a careless man, who
scorned a clothes-brush and was also indifferent to the very obvious
fact that his linen was frayed and dirty.  He was a thin, meagre man,
of not one-half the respectable, well-fed bulk of his companion; his
sallow-complexioned face was worn, and his beard thin and irregular:
altogether he suggested some degree of poor circumstances.  Yet, in
Hetherwick's opinion, he was a person of something beyond ordinary
mental capacity; his eyes were large and intelligent, his nose was
well-shaped, his chin square and determined.  And his ungloved hands
were finely moulded and delicate of proportion; the fingers were long,
thin and tapering.  Hetherwick noticed two facts about those fingers:
the first, that they were restless; the second, that they were much
stained, as if the man had recently been mixing dyes or using
chemicals.  And then he suddenly observed that the big man's hands and
fingers were similarly stained--blue and red and yellow, in patches.

These men were talking when they entered the compartment; they
continued to talk as they settled down.  Hetherwick could not avoid
hearing what they said.

"Queerest experience I've ever had in my time!" the big man was saying
as he dropped into a corner seat.  "Tell you, I knew her the instant I
clapped eyes on that portrait!  After--how many years will it be, now?
Ten, I think--yes, ten.  Oh, yes!  Knew her well enough.  When we get
to my hotel, I'll show you the portrait--I cut it out and put it
aside--and you'll identify it as quick as I did--lay you aught you like
on it!  No mistaking that!"

This was said in a broad North Country accent, in full keeping, thought
Hetherwick, with the burly frame of the speaker.  But the other man
replied in tones that suggested the born Londoner.

"I think I shall be able to recognise it," he said softly.  "I've a
very clear recollection of the lady, though, to be sure, I only saw her
once or twice."

"Aye, well, a fine-looking woman--and a beauty!--like that's not soon
forgotten," declared the other.  "And nowadays the years don't seem to
make much difference to a woman's age.  Anyway, I knew her!--'That's
you, my fine madam,' says I to myself, as soon as ever I unfolded that
paper.  But, mind you, I kept it to myself!  Not a word to my
granddaughter, though she was sitting opposite to me when I made the
discovery.  No--not to anybody!--till to-night.  Not the sort of thing
to blab about--that!"

"Just so," said the smaller man.  "Of course, you'd remember that I was
likely to have some recollection of her and of the circumstances.
Odd!--very.  And I suppose the next thing is--what are you going to do
about it?"

"Oh, well!" replied the big man.  "Of course, ten years have elapsed.
But as to that, it wouldn't matter, you know, if twenty years had
slipped by.  Still----"

At that point he sank his voice to the least of a whisper, bending over
to his companion, and Hetherwick heard no more.  But it seemed to him
that the little man, although he appeared to be listening intently,
was, in reality, doing nothing of the sort.  His long, stained fingers
became more restless than ever; twice, before the train came to
Westminster, he pulled out his watch and glanced at it; once, after
that, Hetherwick caught the nervous hand again shaking towards the
waistcoat pocket.  And he got an idea that the man was regarding his
big, garrulous companion with curiously furtive glances, as if he were
waiting for some vague, yet expected thing, and wondering when it would
materialise: there was a covert watchfulness about him, and though he
nodded his head from time to time as if in assent to what was being
whispered to him, Hetherwick became convinced that he was either
abstracted in thought or taking no interest.  If eyes and fingers were
to be taken as indications, the man's thoughts were elsewhere.

The train pulled up at Westminster, lingered its half-minute, moved
onward again; the big man, still bending down to his companion, went on
whispering; now and then, as if he were telling a good story or making
a clever point, he chuckled.  But suddenly, and without any warning, he
paused, coming to a dead, sharp-cut stop in an apparently easy flow of
language.  He stared wildly around him: Hetherwick caught the flash of
his eye as it swept the compartment, and never forgot the look of
frightened amazement that he saw in it; it was as if the man had been
caught, with lightning-like swiftness, face to face with some awful
thing.  His left hand shut up, clutching at his breast and throat; the
other, releasing the gold-headed cane, shot out as if to ward off a
blow.  It dropped like lead at his side; the other arm relaxed and
fell, limp and nerveless, and before Hetherwick could move, the big,
burly figure sank back in its corner and the eyes closed.

Hetherwick jumped from his seat, shouting to the other man.

"Your friend!" he cried.  "Look!"

But the other man was looking.  He, too, had got to his feet, and he
was bending down and stretching out a hand to the big man's wrist.  He
muttered something that Hetherwick failed to catch.

"What do you say?" demanded Hetherwick impatiently.  "Good heavens!--we
must do something!  The man's--what is it?  A seizure?"

"A seizure!" answered the other.  "Yes--that's it--a seizure!  He'd had
one--slight giddiness--just before we got in.  A--the train's stopping,
though.  Charing Cross?  I--I know a doctor close by."

The train was already pulling up.  Hetherwick flung open the dividing
door between his compartment and the next--he had seen the conductor
down there and he beckoned to him.

"Quick!" he called.  "Here!--there's a man ill--dying, I think!  Come
here!"

The conductor came--slowly.  But when he saw the man in the corner, he
made for the outer door and beckoned to men on the platform.  A
uniformed official ran up and got in.

"What is it?" he asked.  "Gentleman in a fit?  Who's with him?
Anybody?"

Hetherwick looked round for the man with the stained fingers.  But he
was already out of the carriage and on the platform and making for the
stairs that led to the exit.  He flung back a few words, pointing
upward at the same time.

"Doctor!--close by!" he shouted.  "Back in five minutes!--get him out."

But already there was a doctor at hand.  Before the man with the
stained fingers had fairly vanished, other men had come in from the
adjoining compartments; one pushed his way to the front.

"I am a medical man," he said curtly.  "Make way, please."

The other men stood silently watching while the new-comer made a hasty
examination of the still figure.  He turned sharply.

"This man's dead!" he said in quick, matter-of-fact tones.  "Is anyone
with him?"

The train officials glanced at Hetherwick.  But Hetherwick shook his
head.

"I don't know him," he answered.  "There was another man with him--they
got in together at St. James's Park.  You saw the other man," he
continued, turning to the conductor.  "He jumped out as you came in
here, and ran up the stairs, saying that he was going for some doctor,
close by."

"I saw him--heard him, too," assented the conductor.  He glanced at the
stairs and the exit beyond.  "But he ain't come back," he added.

"You had better get the man out," said the doctor.  "Bring him in to
some place on the platform."

A station policeman had come up by that time; he and the railwaymen
lifted the dead man and carried him across the platform to a
waiting-room.  Hetherwick, feeling that he would be wanted, followed in
the rear, the doctor with him.  It struck Hetherwick with grim irony
that as soon as they were off it, the train went on, as if careless and
indifferent.

"Good heavens!" he muttered, more to himself than to the man at his
side.  "That poor fellow was alive, and, as far as I could see, in the
very best of health and spirits, five minutes ago!"

"No doubt!" observed the doctor dryly.  "But he's dead now.  What
happened?"

Hetherwick told him briefly.

"And the other man's--gone!" remarked the doctor.  "Um!  But I suppose
nobody thought of detaining him.  Now--if he doesn't come back--eh?"

"You don't suspect foul play?" exclaimed Hetherwick.

"The circumstances are odd," said his companion.  "I should say the man
just died!  Died as suddenly as man can die--as if he'd been shot dead
or literally blown to fragments.  That's from what you tell me, you
know.  And it may be--a case of poisoning.  Will that other man come
back?  If not----"

By that time Hetherwick was beginning to wonder if the other man would
come back.  He had not come at the end of ten minutes; nor of fifteen;
nor of thirty.  But other men had come, hurrying into the drab-walled
waiting-room and gathering about the table on which the dead man had
been laid.  They were mostly officials and police, and presently a
police surgeon arrived and with him a police inspector, one
Matherfield, who knew Hetherwick.  While the two doctors made another
examination, this man drew Hetherwick aside.  Hetherwick retold his
story; this time with full details.  Matherfield listened and shook his
head.

"That second man won't come back!" he said.  "Gone half an hour now.
Do you think he knew the man was dead before he cleared out?"

"I can't say," replied Hetherwick.  "The whole thing was so quick that
it was all over before I could realise what was happening.  I certainly
saw the other man give the dead man a quick, close inspection.  Then he
literally jumped for the door--he was out of it and running up the
stairs before the train had come to a definite stop."

"You can describe him, Mr. Hetherwick?" suggested the inspector.

"Describe him?--yes.  And identify him, too," asserted Hetherwick.  "He
was a man of certain notable features.  I should know him again,
anywhere."

"Well, we'll have to look for him," said Matherfield.  "And now we'll
have to take this dead man to the mortuary and have a thorough
examination and see what he's got on him.  You'd better come, Mr.
Hetherwick--in fact, I shall want you."

Hetherwick went--in the tail of a sombre procession, himself and the
two medical men walking together.  He had to tell his tale again, to
the police surgeon; that functionary, like all the rest who had heard
the story, shook his head ominously over the disappearance of the
sallow-faced man.

"All an excuse, that," he said.  "There's no doctor close by.  You
didn't get any idea--from their conversation, I mean--of the dead man's
identity?  Any name mentioned?"

"I heard no name mentioned," answered Hetherwick.  "They didn't address
each other by name.  I've no idea who the man is."

That was what he wanted to know.  Somewhere, of course, this dead man
had friends.  He had spoken of his hotel--there, perhaps, somebody was
awaiting his coming; somebody to whom the news of his death would come
as a great shock, perhaps, and terrible trouble.  And he waited with a
feeling that was little short of personal anxiety while the police
searched the dead man's pockets.

The various articles which were presently laid out on a side-table were
many.  There was a purse, well stocked with money; there was loose
money in the pockets.  There was a handsome gold watch and a heavy
chain and locket.  There was a pocket-book, stuffed with letters and
papers.  And there were all the things that a well-provided man
carries--a cigar-case, a silver matchbox, a silver pencil-case, a
pen-knife, and so on; clearly, the dead man had been in comfortable
circumstances.  But the articles of value were brushed aside by the
inspector; his immediate concern was with the contents of the
pocket-book, from which he hastened to take out the letters.  A second
later he turned to Hetherwick and the two doctors, nodding his head
sidewise at the still figure on the table.

"This'll be the name and address," he said, pointing to the envelopes
in his hand.  "Mr. Robert Hannaford, Malter's Private Hotel, Surrey
Street, Strand.  Several letters, you see, addressed there, and all of
recent date.  We'll have to go there--there may be his wife and people
of his there.  Wonder who he was?--somebody from the provinces, most
likely.  Well----"

He laid down the letters and picked up the watch--a fine gold-cased
hunter--and released the back.  Within that was an inscription,
engraved in delicate lettering.  The inspector let out an exclamation.

"Ah!" he said.  "I half suspected that from his appearance.  One of
ourselves!  Look at this--'_Presented to Superintendent Robert
Hannaford, on his retirement, by the Magistrates of Sellithwaite_.'
Sellithwaite, eh?--where's that, now?"

"Yorkshire," replied one of the men standing close by.  "South-West
Riding."

Matherfield closed the watch and laid it by.

"Well," he remarked, "that's evidently who he is--ex-Superintendent
Hannaford, of Sellithwaite, Yorkshire, stopping at Malter's Hotel.
I'll have to go round there.  Mr. Hetherwick, as you were the last man
to see him alive, I wish you'd go with me--it's on your way to the
Temple."

Something closely corresponding to curiosity, not morbid, but
compelling, made Hetherwick accede to this request.  Presently he and
Matherfield walked along the Embankment together, talking of what had
just happened and speculating on the cause of Hannaford's sudden death.

"We may know the exact reason by noon," remarked Matherfield.
"There'll be a post-mortem, of course.  But that other man!--we may get
to know something about him here.  And I wonder whom we shall find
here?  Hope it's not his wife...."




CHAPTER II

WHOSE PORTRAIT IS THIS?

Malter himself opened the door of his small private hotel; a quiet,
reserved man who looked like a retired butler.  He was the sort of man
who is slow of speech, and he had not replied to Matherfield's guarded
inquiry about Mr. Robert Hannaford when a door in the little hall
opened, and a girl appeared, who, hearing the inspector's question,
immediately came forward as if in answer.

Hetherwick recognised this girl.  He had seen her only the previous
afternoon in Fountain Court, in company with a man whom he knew
slightly--Kenthwaite, a fellow-barrister.  Kenthwaite, evidently, was
doing the honours--showing her round the Temple; Hetherwick, in fact,
in passing them, had overheard Kenthwaite telling his companion
something of the history of the old houses and courts around them.  And
the girl had attracted him then.  She was a pretty girl, tall, slim,
graceful, and in addition to her undoubted charm of face and figure,
she looked to have more than an average share of character and
intelligence, and was listening to her guide with obvious interest and
appreciation.  Hetherwick had set her down as being, perhaps, a country
cousin of Kenthwaite's, visiting London, maybe, for the first time.
Anyhow, in merely passing her and Kenthwaite he had noticed her so
closely that he now recognised her at once; he saw, too, that she
recognised him.  But there was another matter more pressing than
that--and she had gone straight to it.

"Are these gentlemen asking for my grandfather?" she inquired, coming
still nearer and glancing from the hotel proprietor to the two callers.
"He's not come in----"

Hetherwick was glad to hear that the dead man was the girl's
grandfather.  Certainly it was a close relationship, but, after all,
not so close as it might have been.  And he was conscious that the
inspector was relieved, too.

"We're asking about Mr. Robert Hannaford," he said.  "Is he your
grandfather--ex-Superintendent Hannaford, of Sellithwaite?  Just
so--well, I'm very sorry to bring bad news about him----"

He broke off, watching the girl keenly, as if he wanted to make sure
that she would take the news quietly.  And evidently reassured on that
point, he suddenly went on definitely:

"You'll understand?" he said.  "It's--well, the worst news.  The fact
is----"

"Is my grandfather dead?" interrupted the girl.  "If that's it, please
say so--I shan't faint, or anything of that sort.  But--I want to know!"

"I'm sorry to say he is dead," replied Matherfield.  "He died suddenly
in the train at Charing Cross.  A seizure, no doubt.  Was he well when
you saw him last?"

The girl turned to the hotel proprietor, who was standing by, evidently
amazed.

"Never saw a gentleman look better or seem better in my life than he
did when he went out of that door at half-past six o'clock!" he
exclaimed.  "Best of health and spirits!"

"My grandfather was quite well," said the girl quietly.  "I never
remember him being anything else but well--he was a very strong,
vigorous man.  Will you please tell me all about it?"

Matherfield told all about it, turning now and then to Hetherwick for
corroboration.  In the end he put a question.

"This man that Mr. Hetherwick saw in your grandfather's company?" he
suggested.  "Do you recognise anyone from that description?"

"No!--no one," answered the girl.  "But my grandfather knew people in
London whom I don't know.  He has been going about a good deal since we
came here, three days ago--looking out for a house."

"Well, we shall have to find that man," remarked Matherfield.  "Of
course, if you'd recognised the description as that of somebody known
to you----"

"No," she said again.  "I know nobody like that.  But now--do you wish
me to go with you--to him?"

"It's not necessary--I wouldn't to-night, if I were you," replied
Matherfield.  "I'll call again in the morning.  Meanwhile, leave
matters to us and the doctors.  You've friends in London, I suppose?"

"Yes, we have friends--relations, in fact," said the girl.  "I must let
them know at once."

Matherfield nodded and turned to the door.  But Hetherwick lingered.
He and the girl were looking at each other.  He suddenly spoke.

"I saw you this afternoon," he said, "in Fountain Court, with a man
whom I know slightly, Mr. Kenthwaite.  Is he, by any chance, one of the
relations you mentioned just now?  Because, if so, he lives close by
me.  I can tell him, if you wish."

"No," she answered, "not a relative.  We know him.  You might tell him,
if you please, and if it's no trouble."

"No trouble at all," said Hetherwick.  "And--if I may--I hope you'll
let me call in the morning to hear if there's anything I can do for
you?"

The girl gave him a quick, responsive glance.

"That's very kind of you," she said.  "Yes."

Hetherwick and the police inspector left the little hotel and walked up
the street.  Matherfield seemed to be in a brown study.  Somewhere up
in the Strand and farther away down Fleet Street the clocks began
striking.

"Seems to me," exclaimed Matherfield suddenly, "seems to me, Mr.
Hetherwick, this is--murder!"

"You mean poison?" said Hetherwick.

"Likely!  Why, yes, of course, it would be poison.  We must have that
man!  You can't add to your description of him?"

"You've already got everything that I can tell.  Pretty full and
accurate, too.  I should say you oughtn't to have much difficulty in
laying hands on him--from my description."

Matherfield made a sound that was half a laugh and half a groan.

"Lord bless you!" he said.  "It's like seeking a needle in a bundle of
hay, searching for a given man in London!  I mean, of course,
sometimes.  More often than not, in fact.  Here's this chap rushes up
the stairs at Charing Cross, vanishes--where?  One man amongst seven
millions of men and women!  However----"

Then they parted, and Hetherwick, full of thought, went home to his
chambers and to bed, and lay equally thoughtful for a long time before
he went to sleep.  He made a poor night of it, but soon after eight
o'clock he was in Kenthwaite's chambers.  Kenthwaite was dressing and
breakfasting at the same time--a ready-packed brief bag and an open
time-table suggested that he was in a hurry to catch a train.  But he
suspended his operations to stare, open-mouthed, wide-eyed at
Hetherwick's news.

"Hannaford!--dead!" he exclaimed.  "Great Scott!--why, he was as fit as
a fiddle at noon yesterday, Hetherwick!  He and his grand daughter
called on me, and I took 'em to lunch--I come from Sellithwaite, you
know, so of course I knew them.  Hannaford had to go as soon as we'd
lunched--some appointment--so I showed the girl round a bit.  Nice
girl, that--clever.  Name of Rhona.  Worth cultivating.  And the old
man's dead!  Bless me!"

"I don't think there's much doubt about foul play," observed Hetherwick.

"Looks uncommonly like it," said Kenthwaite.  He went on with his
double task.  "Well," he added, "sorry, but I can't be of any use to
Miss Hannaford to-day--got to go down to a beastly Quarter Sessions
case, my boy, and precious little time to catch my train.  But
to-morrow--perhaps you can give 'm a hand this morning?"

"Yes," answered Hetherwick.  "I'm doing nothing.  I'll go round there
after a while.  I'm interested naturally.  It's a queer case."

"Queer!  Seems so, rather," assented Kenthwaite.  "Well--give Miss
Hannaford my sympathy and all that, and tell her that if there's
anything I can do when I get back--you know what to say."

"She said she'd relations here in London," remarked Hetherwick.

"Cousins--aunts--something or other--over Tooting way, I think," agreed
Kenthwaite.  "Twenty past eight!--Hetherwick, I'll have to rush for it!"

He swallowed the last of his coffee, seized the bag and darted away;
Hetherwick went back to his own chambers and breakfasted leisurely.
And all the time he sat there he was pondering over the event of the
previous midnight, and especially upon the sudden disappearance of the
man with the stained fingers.  To Hetherwick that disappearance seemed
to argue guilt.  He figured it in this way--the man who ran away at
Charing Cross had poisoned this other man in some clever and subtle
fashion, by means of something which took a certain time to take
effect, and, when that time arrived, did its work with amazing
swiftness.  Hetherwick, in his war service, had seen men die more times
than he cared to remember.  He had seen some men shot through the
brain; he had seen others shot through the heart.  But he had never
seen any of these men--some of them shot at his very side--die with the
extraordinary quickness with which Hannaford had died.  And he came to
a conclusion: if the man with the stained fingers had poisoned
Hannaford, then he was somebody who had a rare and a profound knowledge
of poisons.

He went round to Surrey Street at ten o'clock.  Miss Hannaford, said
the hotel proprietor, had gone with her aunt, a Mrs. Keeley, who had
come early that morning, to see her grandfather's dead body--some
police official had fetched them.  But she had left a message for
anyone who called--that she would not be long away.  And Hetherwick
waited in the little dingy coffee-room; there were certain questions
that he wanted to put to Rhona Hannaford, also he wanted to give her
certain information.

"Very sad case this, sir," observed the hotel proprietor, hovering
about his breakfast-tables.  "Cruel end for a fine healthy gentleman
like Mr. Hannaford!"

"Very sad," agreed Hetherwick.  "You said last night--or, rather, this
morning--that Mr. Hannaford was in good health and spirits when he went
out early in the evening?"

"The best, sir!  He was a cheery, affable gentleman--fond of his joke.
Joked and laughed with me as I opened the door for him--never thinking,
sir, as I should never see him again alive!"

"You don't know where he was going?"

"I don't, sir.  And his granddaughter--clever young lady, that,
sir--she don't know, neither.  She went to a theatre, along of her
aunt, the lady that came early this morning.  We wired the bad news to
her first thing, and she came along at once.  But him--no, I don't know
where he went to spend his evening.  Been in and out, and mostly out,
ever since they were here, three days ago.  House-hunting, so I
understood."

Rhona Hannaford presently returned, in company with a motherly-looking
woman whom she introduced as her aunt, Mrs. Keeley.  Then Hetherwick
remembered that he had not introduced himself; rectifying that
omission, he found that Kenthwaite had told Rhona who he was when he
passed them the previous afternoon.  He delivered Kenthwaite's message
and in his absence offered his own services.

"It's very good of you," said Rhona.  "I don't know that there's
anything to do.  The police seem to be doing everything--the inspector
who was here last night was very kind just now, but, as he said,
there's nothing to be done until after the inquest."

"Yes," said Hetherwick.  "And that is--did he say when?"

"To-morrow morning.  He said I should have to go," replied Rhona.

"So shall I," observed Hetherwick.  "They'll only want formal evidence
from you.  I shall have to say more.  I wish I could say more than I
shall have to say."

The two women glanced at him inquiringly.

"I mean," he continued, "that I wish I had stopped the other man from
leaving the train.  I suppose you have not heard anything from the
police about him--that man?"

"Nothing.  They had not found him or heard of him up to just now.  But
you can tell me something that I very much want to know.  You saw this
man with my grandfather for some little time, didn't you?"

"From St. James's Park to Charing Cross."

"Did you overhear their conversation, or any of it?"

"A good deal--at first.  Afterwards, your grandfather began to whisper,
and I heard nothing of that.  But one reason I had for calling upon you
this morning was that I might tell you what I did overhear, and another
that I might ask you some questions arising out of what I heard.  Mr.
Hannaford was talking to this man, now missing, about some portrait or
photograph.  Evidently it was of a lady whom he, your grandfather, had
known ten years ago; whom the other man had also known.  Your
grandfather said that when they got to his hotel he would show the
portrait to the other man who, he asserted, would be sure to recognise
it.  Now, had Mr. Hannaford said anything to you?  Do you know anything
about his bringing any friend of his to this hotel last night?  And do
you know anything about any portrait or photograph such as that to
which he referred?"

"About bringing anyone here--no!  He never said anything to me about
it.  But about a photograph, or rather about a print of one--yes.  I do
know something about that."

"What?" asked Hetherwick eagerly.

"Well, this," she answered.  "My grandfather, who, as I dare say you
know by this time, was for a good many years Superintendent of Police
at Sellithwaite, had a habit of cutting things out of
newspapers--paragraphs, accounts of criminal trials, and so on.  He had
several boxes full of such cuttings.  When we were coming to town the
other day I saw him cut a photograph out of some illustrated paper he
was reading in the train, and put it away in his pocket-book--in a
pocket-book, I ought to say, for he had two or three pocket-books.
This morning I was looking through various things which he had left
lying about on his dressing-table upstairs, and in one of his
pocket-books I found the photograph which he cut out in the train.
That must be the one you mention--it's of a very handsome,
distinguished-looking woman."

"If I may see it----" suggested Hetherwick.

Within a couple of minutes he had the cutting in his hand--a scrap of
paper, neatly snipped out of its surrounding letterpress, which was a
print of a photograph of a woman of apparently thirty-five to forty
years of age, evidently of high position, and certainly, as Rhona
Hannaford had remarked, of handsome and distinguished features.  But it
was not at the photograph that Hetherwick gazed with eyes into which
surmise and speculation were beginning to steal; after a mere glance at
it, his attention fixed itself on some pencilled words on the margin at
its sides:

"_Through my hands ten years ago!_"


"Is that your grandfather's writing?" he inquired suddenly.

"Yes, that's his," replied Rhona.  "He had a habit of pencilling notes
and comments on his cuttings--all sorts of remarks."

"He didn't mention this particular cutting to you when he cut it out?"

"No--he said nothing about it.  I saw him cut it out, and heard him
chuckle as he put it away, but he said--nothing."

"You don't know who this lady is?"

"Oh, no!  You see, there's no name beneath it.  I suppose there was in
the paper, but he cut out nothing but the picture and the bit of
margin.  But from what he's written there, I conclude that this is a
portrait of some woman who had been in trouble with the police at some
time or other."

"Obvious!" muttered Hetherwick.  He sat silently inspecting the picture
for a minute or two.

"Look here," he said suddenly, "I want you to let me help in trying to
get at the bottom of this--naturally you want to have it cleared up.
And to begin with, let me have this cutting, and for the present don't
tell anyone--I mean the police or any inquirers--that I have it.  I'd
like to have a talk about it to Kenthwaite.  You understand?  As I was
present at your grandfather's death, I'd like to solve the mystery of
it.  If you'll leave this to me----"

"Oh, yes!" replied Rhona.  "But--you think there has been foul
play?--that he didn't die a natural death?--that it wasn't just heart
failure or----"

The door of the little coffee-room was opened and Matherfield looked
in.  Seeing Hetherwick there, he beckoned him into the hall, closing
the door again as the young barrister joined him.  Hetherwick saw that
he was full of news, and instantly thought of the man with the stained
fingers.

"Well?" he said eagerly, "laid your hands on that fellow?"

"Oh, him?--no!" answered Matherfield.  "Not a word or sign of him--so
far!  But the doctors have finished their post-mortem.  And there's no
doubt about their verdict.  Poisoned!"

Matherfield sank his voice to a whisper as he spoke the last word.  And
Hetherwick, ready though he was for the news, started when he got
it--the definiteness of the announcement seemed like opening a window
upon a vista of obscured and misty distances.  He glanced at the door
behind him.

"Of course, they'll have to be told, in there," said Matherfield,
interpreting his thoughts.  "But the thing's certain.  Our surgeon
suspected it from the first, and he got a Home Office specialist to
help at the autopsy--they say the man was poisoned by some drug or
other--I don't understand these things--that had been administered to
him two or three hours before he died, and that when it did work,
worked with absolutely lightning-like effect."

"Yes," muttered Hetherwick thoughtfully.  "Lightning-like effect--good
phrase.  I can testify that it did that!"

Matherfield laid a hand on the door.

"Well," he said, "I'd better tell these ladies.  Then--there are things
I want to know from the granddaughter.  I've seen her--and her
aunt--before this morning.  I found out that Hannaford brought up and
educated this girl, and that she lived with him in Sellithwaite since
she left school, so she'll know more about him than anybody.  And I
want to learn all I can.  Come in with me."




CHAPTER III

THE POTENTIAL FORTUNE

Elder and younger woman alike took Matherfield's intimation quietly.
Rhona made no remark.  But Mrs. Keeley spoke impulsively.

"There never was a more popular man than he was--with everybody!" she
exclaimed.  "Who should want to take his life?"

"That's just what we've got to find out, ma'am," said Matherfield.
"And I want to know as much as I can--I dare say Miss Hannaford can
tell me a lot.  Now, let's see what we do know from what you told me
this morning.  Mr. Hannaford had been Superintendent of Police at
Sellithwaite for some years.  He had recently retired on his pension.
He proposed to live in London, and you and he, Miss Hannaford, came to
London to look for a suitable house, arrived three days ago, and put up
at this hotel.  That's all correct?  Very good--now then, let me hear
all about his movements during the last three days.  What did he do?
Where did he spend his time?"

"I can't tell you much," answered Rhona.  "He was out most of the day,
and generally by himself.  I was only out with him twice--once when we
went to do some shopping, another time when we called on Mr. Kenthwaite
at his rooms in the Temple.  I understood he was looking for a
house--seeing house agents and so on.  He was out morning, afternoon
and evening."

"Did he never tell you anything about where he'd been, or whom he'd
seen?"

"No.  He was the sort of man who keeps things to himself.  I have no
idea where he went nor whom he saw."

"Didn't say anything about where he was going last night?"

"No.  He only said that he was going out and that I should find him
here when I got back from the theatre, to which I was going with Mrs.
Keeley.  We got back here soon after eleven.  But he hadn't come in--as
you know."

"You never heard him speak of having enemies?"

"I should think he hadn't an enemy in the world!  He was a very kind
man and very popular, even with the people he had to deal with as a
police-superintendent."

"And I suppose he'd no financial worries--anything of that sort?  Nor
any other troubles--nothing to bother him?"

"I don't think he'd a care in the world," said Rhona confidently.  "He
was looking forward with real zest to settling down in London.  And as
to financial worries, he'd none.  He was well off."

"Always a saving, careful man," remarked Mrs. Keeley.  "Oh, yes, quite
well off--apart from his pension."

Matherfield glanced at Hetherwick, who had listened carefully to all
that was asked and answered.  Something in the glance seemed to invite
him to take a hand.

"This occurs to me," said Hetherwick.  He turned to Rhona.  "Apart from
this house-hunting, do you know whether your grandfather had any
business affair in hand in London?  What I'm thinking of is this--from
what I saw of him in the train, he appeared to be an active, energetic
man, not the sort of man who, because he'd retired, would sit down in
absolute idleness.  Do you know of anything that he thought of
undertaking--any business he thought of joining?"

Rhona considered this question for a while.

"Not any business," she replied at last.  "But there is something that
may have to do with what you suggest.  My grandfather had a hobby.  He
experimented in his spare time."

"What in?" asked Hetherwick.  Then he suddenly remembered the stained
fingers that he had noticed on the hands of both men the night before.
"Was it chemicals?" he added quickly.

"Yes, in chemicals," she answered with a look of surprise.  "How did
you know that?"

"I noticed that his hands and fingers were stained," replied
Hetherwick.  "So were those of the man he was with.  Well--but this
something?"

"He had a little laboratory in our garden at Sellithwaite," she
continued.  "He spent all his spare time in it--he'd done that for
years.  Lately, I know, he'd been trying to invent or discover
something--I don't know what.  But just before we left Sellithwaite, he
told me that he'd solved the problem, and when he was sorting out and
packing up his papers he showed me a sealed envelope in which he said
were the particulars of his big discovery--he said there was a
potential fortune in it and that he should die a rich man.  I saw him
put that envelope in a pocket-book which he always carried with him."

"That would be the pocket-book I examined last night," said
Matherfield.  "There was no sealed envelope, nor one of which any seal
had been broken, in that.  There was nothing but letters, receipts and
unimportant papers."

"It is not in his other pocket-books," declared Rhona.  "I went through
all his things myself very early this morning--through everything that
he had here.  I know that he had that envelope yesterday--he pulled out
some things from his pocket when we were lunching with Mr. Kenthwaite
in a restaurant in Fleet Street, and I saw the envelope.  It was a
stout, square envelope, across the front of which he had drawn two
thick red lines, and it was heavily sealed with black sealing-wax at
the back."

"That was yesterday, you say?" asked Matherfield sharply.  "Yesterday
noon?  Just so!  Then as he had it yesterday at noon, and as it wasn't
in his pockets last night and is not among his effects in this house,
it's very clear that between, say, two o'clock yesterday and midnight
he parted with it.  Now then, to whom?  That's a thing we've just got
to find out!  But you're sure he wasn't joking when he told you that
this discovery, or invention, or whatever it was, was worth a potential
fortune?"

"On the contrary, he was very serious," replied Rhona.  "Unusually
serious for him.  He wouldn't tell me what it was, nor give me any
particulars--all he said was that he'd solved a problem and hit on a
discovery that he'd worked over for years, and that the secret was in
that envelope and worth no end of money.  I asked him what he meant by
no end of money and he said: 'Well, at any rate, a hundred thousand
pounds--in time.'"

The two men exchanged glances; silence fell on the whole group.

"Oh!" said Matherfield at last.  "A secret worth a hundred thousand
pounds--in time.  This will have to be looked into--narrowly.  What do
you think, Mr. Hetherwick?"

"Yes," answered Hetherwick.  "You've no idea, of course, as to whether
your grandfather had done anything about putting this discovery on the
market--or made any arrangement about selling it?  No!  Well, can you
tell me this: What sort of house did your grandfather want to rent here
in London?  I mean, do you know what rent he was prepared to pay?"

"I can answer that," remarked Mrs. Keeley.  "He told me he wanted a
good house--a real good one--in a convenient suburb, and he was willing
to go up to three hundred a year."

"Three hundred a year," said Hetherwick.  He exchanged a meaning glance
with Matherfield.  "That," he added, "looks as if he felt assured of a
considerable income, and as though he had already realised on his
discovery or was very certain of doing so."

"To be sure," agreed Matherfield.  "Of course, I don't know what his
private means were, but I know what his retiring pension would be--and
three hundred a year for rent alone means--a good deal!  Um!--we'll
have to endeavour to trace that sealed envelope."

"It seems to me, Matherfield," observed Hetherwick, "that the first
thing to do is to trace Hannaford's movements last night, from the time
he left this hotel until his death in the train."

"We're at that already," replied Matherfield.  "We've a small army of
men at work.  But as we want all the help we can get, I'm going to stir
up the newspaper men, Mr. Hetherwick--the Press, sir, is always
valuable in this sort of thing!--and I want Miss Hannaford, if she's
got one, to give me a recent photograph of her grandfather so that it
can appear in the papers.  Somebody, you know, may recognise
it--somebody who saw him last night with somebody else."

Rhona had a new photograph of the dead man, taken in plain clothes just
before he left Sellithwaite, and she gave Matherfield some copies of
it.  Reproductions appeared in the _Meteor_ and other evening papers
that night, and in some of the dailies next morning.  And, as a result,
a man came forward at the inquest, a few hours later, who declared with
positive assurance that he had seen Hannaford early in the evening of
the murder.  His appearance was the only sensational thing about these
necessarily only preliminary proceedings before the coroner; until he
stepped forward nothing had transpired with which Hetherwick was not
already familiar.  There had been his own evidence; somewhat to his
surprise neither coroner nor police seemed to pay much attention to his
account of the conversation about the woman's portrait; they appeared
to regard Hannaford's observations as a bit of garrulous reminiscence
about some criminal or other.  There had been Rhona's--a repetition of
what she had told Matherfield and Hetherwick at Malter's Hotel: police
and coroner evidently fixed on the missing sealed envelope and its
mysterious secret as a highly important factor in the case.  Then there
had been the expert testimony of the two doctors as to the cause of
death--that had been confined to positive declarations that Hannaford
died from the administration of some subtle poison, the exact details
being left over until experts could tell more at the adjourned
proceedings.  And the coroner was about to adjourn for a fortnight when
a man, who had entered the court and been in conversation with the
officials, was put into the witness-box to tell a story which certainly
added information and, at the same time, accentuated mystery.

This man was a highly-respectable person in appearance, middle-aged,
giving the name of Martin Charles Ledbitter, manager of an insurance
office in Westminster, and residing at Sutton, in Surrey.  It was his
habit, he said, to travel every evening from Victoria to Sutton by the
7.20 train.  As a rule he arrived at Victoria just before seven and
took a cup of tea in the refreshment-room.  He did this on the night
before last.  While he was drinking his tea at the counter, an elderly
man came in and stood by him, whom he was sure beyond doubt was the
same man whose photograph was reproduced in some of last night's and
some of this morning's newspapers.  He had no doubt whatever about
this.  He first noticed the man's stained fingers as he took up the
glass of whisky-and-soda which he had ordered; he had, at the time,
wondered at the contrast between those fingers and the general
spick-and-spanness of the man and his smart attire; also he had noticed
his gold-headed walking-cane and that the head was fashioned like a
crown.  They stood side by side for some minutes, then the man went
out.  A minute or two later he saw him again--this time at the
right-hand side bookstall; he was there obviously looking out for
somebody.

This was the point where the interest really began; everybody in court
strained eyes and ears as the coroner put a direct question.

"Looking out for somebody?  Did you see him meet anybody?"

"I did!"

"Tell me what you saw."

"I saw this.  When I approached the bookstall, to buy some evening
papers, the man whom I had seen in the refreshment-room was standing
close by.  He was looking about him, but chiefly at the entrances to
the big space between the offices and the platforms.  Once or twice he
looked at his watch.  It was then--by the station clock--about ten
minutes past seven.  He seemed impatient; he moved restlessly about.  I
passed him and went to the bookstall.  When I turned round again he was
standing a few yards away, shaking hands with another man.  From the
way in which they shook hands, I concluded that they were old friends,
who perhaps had not seen each other for some time."

"Their greeting was cordial?"

"I should call it effusive."

"Can you describe the other man?"

"I can describe a sort of general impression of both.  He was a tall
man, taller than Hannaford, but not so broadly built.  He wore a dark
ulster overcoat, with a strap at the back; it was either a very dark
blue or a black in colour.  He had a silk hat--new and glossy.  He gave
me the impression of being a smartly-dressed man--smart boots and
gloves and that sort of thing--you know the general impression you get
at a quick glance.  But as to his features, I can't tell you anything."

"Why not?" asked the coroner.

"Because, to begin with, he wore an unusually large pair of blue
spectacles, which completely veiled his eyes, and to end with, his
throat and chin were swathed in a heavy white muffler, which covered
the lower part of his face as well.  Between the rim of his hat and the
collar of his coat it was all muffler and spectacles!"

The coroner looked disappointed.  His interest in the witness seemed to
evaporate.

"Did you notice anything else?" he asked.

"Only that the new-comer took Hannaford's arm and that they walked away
towards the left-hand entrance hall, evidently in earnest conversation.
That was the last I saw of them."

"There's just one question I should like to put to you in conclusion,"
said the coroner.  "You say that you are confident that the photograph
in the newspapers is that of the man you saw at Victoria.  Now, have
you seen the dead man's body?"

"I have.  The police took me to see it when I volunteered my evidence."

"And you recognised it as that of the man you saw?"

"Without doubt!  There is no question of that in my mind."

Five minutes later the inquest stood adjourned, and those chiefly
concerned gathered together in the emptying court to discuss the
voluntary witness's evidence.  Matherfield manifested an almost
cheerful optimism.

"This is better!--much better," he declared, rubbing his hands as if in
anticipation of laying them on something.  "We know now that Hannaford
met, at any rate, two men that night.  It's easier to find two men than
one!"

Rhona, whom Hetherwick had escorted to the coroner's court, looked her
astonishment.  "How can that be?" she asked.

"Mr. Hetherwick understands," answered Matherfield with a laugh.
"He'll tell you."

But Hetherwick said nothing.  He was always wondering--always
wondering--about the woman whose picture lay in his pocket.




CHAPTER IV

THE DIAMOND NECKLACE

The conviction that there was more than met the eye in Hannaford's
cutting out and putting away the handsome and distinguished woman's
photograph grew mightily in Hetherwick's mind during the next few days.
He recalled all that Hannaford had said about it in the train in those
few short minutes before his sudden death.  Why had he been so keen
about showing it to the other man?  Was he taking the other man
specially to his hotel to show it to him--at that time of night?  Why
did the recollections which his possession of it brought up afford
him--obviously--so much interest and, it seemed, amusement?  And what,
exactly, was meant by the pencilled words in the margin of the
cutting?--_Through my hands ten years ago_!  Under what circumstances
had this woman been through Hannaford's hands?  And who was she?  The
more he thought of it, the more Hetherwick was convinced that there was
more importance in this matter than the police attached to it.  They
had proved utterly indifferent to Hetherwick's account of the
conversation in the train--that, said Matherfield, with official
superiority, was nothing but a bit of chat, reminiscence, recollection,
on the ex-superintendent's part; old men, he said, were fond of talking
about incidents of the past.  The only significance Matherfield saw in
it was that it seemed to argue that whoever the man who had disappeared
was, he and Hannaford had known each other ten years ago.

At the end of a week the police had heard nothing of this man.  Nor had
they made any discovery in respect of the other man whom Ledbitter
swore he had seen with Hannaford at Victoria.  The best Scotland Yard
hands had been hard and continuously at work, and had brought nothing
to light.  Only one person had seen the first man after he darted up
the stairs of Charing Cross calling out that he was going for a doctor;
this was a policeman on duty at the front of the Underground Station.
He had seen the man run out; had watched him run at top speed up
Villiers Street, and had thought no more of it than that he was some
belated passenger hurrying to catch a last bus in the Strand.  But with
that, all news and trace of him vanished.  Of the tall man in the big
blue spectacles and white muffler there never was any trace, nor any
news beyond Ledbitter's.  Yet Ledbitter was a thoroughly dependable
witness, and there was no doubt that he had seen Hannaford in this
man's company.  So, without question, Hannaford, during his last few
hours of life, had been with two men--neither of whom could be found.
Within twenty-four hours of his death several men came forward
voluntarily who had had dealings or conversation with Hannaford since
his arrival in London.  But there was a significant fact about the news
which any of them could give--not one knew anything of the tall man
seen by Ledbitter, or of the shabby man seen by Hetherwick, or of the
secret which Hannaford carried in his sealed packet.  The story of that
sealed packet had been told plentifully in the newspapers--but nobody
came forward who knew anything about it.  And when a week had elapsed
after the ex-Superintendent's burial, the whole mystery of his
undoubted murder seemed likely to become one of the many which are
never solved.

But Hetherwick was becoming absorbed in this affair into which he had
been so curiously thrown head-first.  He had leisure on his hands;
also, he was well off in this world's goods, and much more concerned
with the psychology of his profession than with a desire to earn money
by its practice.  From the moment in which he heard that the doctors
had found that Hannaford had been poisoned, he felt that here was a
murder mystery at the bottom of which he must get--it fascinated him.
And all through his speculations and theorisings about it, he was
obsessed by the picture in his pocket.  Who was that woman--and what
did the dead man remember about her?

Suddenly, one morning, after a visit from Matherfield, who looked in at
his chambers casually, to tell him that the police had discovered
nothing, Hetherwick put on his hat and went round to Surrey Street.  He
found Rhona Hannaford busy in preparing to leave Malter's Hotel: she was
going to live, for a time at any rate, with Mrs. Keeley.  Hetherwick
went straight to the matter that had brought him.

"That print of a woman's photograph which your grandfather had in his
pocket-book," he said, "and that's now in mine.  Out of what paper did
he cut it?--a newspaper, evidently."

"Yes, but I don't know what paper," answered Rhona.  "All I know is
that it was a paper which he got by post, the morning that he left
Sellithwaite.  We were just leaving for the station when the post came.
He put his letters and papers--there were several things--in his
overcoat pocket, and opened them in the train.  It was somewhere on the
way to London that he cut out that picture.  He threw the paper
away--with others.  He had a habit of buying a lot of papers, and used
to cut out paragraphs."

"Well--I suppose it can be traced," muttered Hetherwick, thinking
aloud.  He glanced at the evidences of Rhona's departure.  "So you're
going to live with your aunt?" he said.

"For a time--yes," she answered.

"I hope you'll let me call?" suggested Hetherwick.  "I'm awfully
interested in this affair, and I may be able to tell you something
about it."

"We'd be pleased," she replied.  "I'll give you the address.  I don't
intend to be idle though--unless you call in the evening, you'll
probably find me out."

"What are you thinking of doing?" he asked.

"I think of going in for secretarial work," she answered.  "As a matter
of fact, I had a training for that, in Sellithwaite.  Typewriting,
correspondence, accounts, French, German--I'm pretty well equipped."

"Don't think me inquisitive," said Hetherwick, suddenly.  "I hope your
grandfather hasn't forgotten you in his will--I heard he'd left one!"

"Thank you," replied Rhona.  "He hasn't.  He left me everything.  I've
got about three hundred a year--rather more.  But that's no reason why
I should sit down, and do nothing, is it?"

"Good!" said Hetherwick.  "But--if that sealed packet could be found?
What was worth a hundred thousand to him, would be worth a hundred
thousand to his sole legatee.  Worth finding!"

"I wonder if anything will be found?" she answered.  "The whole thing's
a mystery that I'm not even on the edge of solving."

"Time!" said Hetherwick.  "And--patience."

He went away presently, and strolled round to Brick Court, where
Kenthwaite had his chambers.

"Doing anything?" he asked, as he walked in.

"Nothing," replied Kenthwaite.  "Go ahead!"

Hetherwick sat down, and lighted his pipe.

"You know Sellithwaite, don't you?" he asked when he had got his
tobacco well going.  "Your town, eh?"

"Born and bred there, and engaged to a girl there," replied Kenthwaite.
"Ought to!  What about Sellithwaite?"

"Were you there ten years ago?" demanded Hetherwick.

"Ten years ago?  No--except in the holidays.  I was at school ten years
ago.  Why?"

"Do you remember any police case at Sellithwaite about that time in
which a very handsome woman was concerned--probably as defendant?"

"No!  But I was more interested in cricket than in crime, in those
days.  Are you thinking about the woman Hannaford spoke of in the train
to the chap they can't come across?"

"I am!  Seems to me there's more in that than the police think."

"Shouldn't wonder.  Let's see: Hannaford spoke of that woman as--what?"

"Said she'd been through his hands, ten years ago."

"Well, that's easy!  If she was through Hannaford's hands, as
Superintendent of Police, ten years ago, that would be at Sellithwaite.
And there'll be records, particulars, and so on at Sellithwaite."

Hetherwick nodded, and smoked in silence for awhile.

"Think I shall go down there," he said at last.

Kenthwaite stared, wonderingly.

"Keen as all that!" he exclaimed.

"Queer business!" said Hetherwick.  "Like to solve it."

"Oh, well, it's only a four hours' run from King's Cross," observed
Kenthwaite.  "Interesting town, too.  Old as the hills and modern as
they make 'em.  Excellent hotel--'White Bear.'  And I'll tell you what,
my future's brother is a solicitor there--Michael Hollis.  I'll give
you a letter of introduction to him, and he'll show you round and give
you any help you need."

"Good man!" said Hetherwick.  "Write it!"

Kenthwaite sat down and wrote, and handed over the result.

"What do you want to find out, exactly?" he asked, as Hetherwick
thanked him, and rose to go.

"All about the woman, and why Hannaford cut her picture out of the
paper," answered Hetherwick.  "Well--see you when I get back."

He went off to his own chambers, packed a bag, and drove to King's
Cross to catch the early afternoon train for the North.  At half-past
seven that evening he found himself in Sellithwaite, a grey,
smoke-laden town set in the midst of bleak and rugged hills, where the
folk--if the railway officials were anything to go by--spoke a dialect
which, to Hetherwick's southern ears, sounded like some barbaric
language.  But the "White Bear," in which he was presently installed,
yielded all the comforts and luxuries of a first-class hotel: the
dining-room, into which Hetherwick turned as soon as he had booked his
room, seemed to be thronged by a thoroughly cosmopolitan crowd of men;
he heard most of the principal European languages being spoken--later,
he found that his fellow-guests were principally Continental business
men, buyers, intent on replenishing exhausted stocks from the great
warehouses and manufactories of Sellithwaite.  All this was
interesting, nor was he destined to spend the remainder of his evening
in contemplating it from a solitary corner, for he had scarcely eaten
his dinner when a hall-porter came to tell him that Mr. Hollis was
asking for Mr. Hetherwick.

Hetherwick hastened into the lounge, and found a keen-faced,
friendly-eyed man of forty or thereabouts stretching out a hand to him.

"Kenthwaite wired me this afternoon that you were coming down, and
asked me to look you up here," he said.  "I'd have asked you to dine
with me, but I've been kept at my office until just now, and again, I
live a good many miles out of town.  But to-morrow night----"

"You're awfully good," replied Hetherwick.  "I'd no idea that
Kenthwaite was wiring.  He gave me a letter of introduction to you, but
I suppose he thought I wanted to lose no time.  And I don't, and I dare
say you can tell me something about the object of my visit--let's find
a corner and smoke."

Installed in an alcove in the big smoking-room, Hollis read
Kenthwaite's letter.

"What is it you're after?" he asked.  "Kenthwaite mentions that my
knowledge of Sellithwaite is deeper than his own--naturally, it is, as
I'm several years older."

"Well," responded Hetherwick.  "It's this, briefly.  You're aware, of
course, of what befell your late Police-Superintendent in London--his
sudden death?"

"Oh, yes--read all the newspapers, anyway," assented Hollis.  "You're
the man who was present in the train on the Underground, aren't you?"

"I am.  And that's one reason why I'm keen on solving the mystery.
There's no doubt whatever that Hannaford was poisoned--that it's a case
of deliberate murder.  Now, there's a feature of the case to which the
police don't seem to attach any importance.  I do attach great
importance to it.  It's the matter of the woman to whom Hannaford
referred when he was talking--in my presence--to the man who so
mysteriously disappeared.  Hannaford spoke of that woman as having been
through his hands ten years ago.  That would be some experience he had
here, in this town.  Now then, do you know anything about it?  Does it
arouse any recollection?"

Hollis, who was smoking a cigar, thoughtfully tapped its long ash
against the edge of his coffee-cup.  Suddenly his eyes brightened.

"That's probably the Whittingham case," he said.  "It was about ten
years ago."

"And what was the Whittingham case?" asked Hetherwick.  "Case of a
woman?"

"Of a woman--evidently an adventuress--who came to Sellithwaite about
ten years ago, and stayed here some little time, in this very hotel,"
replied Hollis.  "Oddly enough, I never saw her!  But she was heard of
enough--eventually.  She came here, to the 'White Bear,' alone, with
plenty of luggage and evident funds.  I understand she was a very
handsome woman, twenty-eight or thirty years of age, and she was taken
for somebody of consequence.  I rather think she described herself as
the Honourable Mrs. Whittingham.  She paid her bills here with
unfailing punctuality every Saturday morning.  She spent a good deal of
money amongst the leading tradesmen in the town, and always paid cash.
In short, she established her credit very successfully.  And with
nobody more so than the principal jeweller here--Malladale.  She bought
a lot of jewellery from Malladale--but in his case, she always paid by
cheque.  And in the end it was through a deal with Malladale that she
got into trouble."

"And into Hannaford's hands!" suggested Hetherwick.

"Into Hannaford's hands, certainly," assented Hollis.  "It was this
way.  She had, as I said just now, made a lot of purchases from
Malladale, who, I may tell you, has a first-class trade amongst our
rich commercial magnates in this neighbourhood.  Her transactions with
him, however, were never, at first, in amounts exceeding a hundred or
two.  But they went through all right.  She used to pay him by cheque
drawn on a Manchester bank--Manchester, you know, is only thirty-five
miles away.  As her first cheques were always met, Malladale never
bothered about making any inquiry about her financial stability; like
everybody else he was very much impressed by her.  Well, in the end,
she'd a big deal with Malladale, Malladale had a very fine diamond
necklace in stock.  He and she used to discuss her acquisition of it:
according to his story they had a fine old battle as to terms.
Eventually, they struck a bargain--he let her have it for three
thousand nine hundred pounds.  She gave him a cheque for that amount
there and then, and he let her carry off the necklace."

"Oh!" exclaimed Hetherwick.

"Just so!" agreed Hollis.  "But--he did.  However, for some reason or
other, Malladale had that cheque specially cleared.  She handed it to
him on a Monday afternoon; first thing on Wednesday morning Malladale
found that it had been returned with the ominous reference to drawer
inscribed on its surface!  Naturally, he hurried round to the 'White
Bear.'  But the Honourable Mrs. Whittingham had disappeared.  She had
paid up her account, taken her belongings, and left the hotel, and the
town, late on the Monday evening, and all that could be discovered at
the station was that she had travelled by the last train to Leeds,
where, of course, there are several big main lines to all parts of
England.  And she had left no address: she had, indeed, told the people
here that she should be back before long, and that if any letters came
they were to keep them until her return.  So then Malladale went to the
police, and Hannaford got busy."

"I gather that he traced her?" suggested Hetherwick.

Hollis laughed sardonically.

"Hannaford traced her--and he got her," he answered.  "But he might
well use the expression that you mentioned just now.  She was indeed
through his hands--just as a particularly slippery eel might have
been--she got clear away from him."




CHAPTER V

THE POLICE RETURN

Hetherwick now began to arrive at something like an understanding of a
matter that had puzzled him ever since and also at the time of the
conversation between Hannaford and his companion in the train.  He had
noted then that whatever it was that Hannaford was telling, he was
telling it as a man tells a story against himself; there had been signs
of amused chagrin and discomfiture in his manner.  Now he saw why.

"Ah!" he exclaimed.  "She was one too many for him.  Then?"

"A good many times too many!" laughed Hollis.  "She did Hannaford
completely.  He strove hard to find her, and did a great deal of the
spade-work himself.  And at last he ran her down--in a fashionable
hotel in London.  He had a Scotland Yard man with him, and a detective
from our own police-office here, a man named Gandham, who is still in
the force--I'll introduce you to him to-morrow.  Hannaford, finding
that Mrs. Whittingham had a suite of rooms in this hotel--a big West
End place--left his two men downstairs, or outside, and went up to see
her alone.  According to his own account, she was highly indignant at
any suspicions being cast upon her, and still more so, rose to a pitch
of most virtuous indignation when he told her that he'd got a warrant
for her arrest and that she'd have to go with him.  During a brief
interchange of remarks she declared that if her bankers at Manchester
had returned her cheque unpaid it must have been merely because they
hadn't realised certain valuable securities which she'd sent to them,
and that if Malladale had presented his cheque a few days later it
would have been all right.  Now, that was all bosh!--Hannaford, of
course, had been in communication with the bankers; all they knew of
the lady was that she had opened an account with them while staying at
some hotel in Manchester, and that she had drawn all but a few pounds
of her balance the very day on which she had got the necklace from
Malladale and fled with it from Sellithwaite.  Naturally, Hannaford
didn't tell her this--he merely reiterated his demand that she should
go with him.  She assented at once, only stipulating that there should
be no fuss--she would walk out of the hotel with him, and he and his
satellites could come back and search her belongings at their leisure.
Then Hannaford--who, between you and me, Hetherwick, had an eye for a
pretty woman!--made his mistake.  Her bedroom opened out of the
sitting-room in which he'd had his interview with her; he was fool
enough to let her go into it alone, to get ready to go with him.  She
went--and that was the very last Hannaford ever saw of her!"

"Made a lightning exit, eh?" remarked Hetherwick.

"She must have gone instantly," asserted Hollis.  "A door opened from
the bedroom into a corridor--she must have picked up hat and coat and
walked straight away, leaving everything she had there.  Anyway, when
Hannaford, tired of waiting, knocked at the door and looked in, his
bird was flown.  Then, of course, there was a hue-and-cry, and a fine
revelation.  But she'd got clear away, probably by some side door or
other exit, and although Hannaford, according to his own account, raked
London with a comb for her, she was never found.  Vanished!"

"And the necklace?" inquired Hetherwick.

"That had vanished too," replied Hollis.  "They searched her trunks and
things, but they found nothing but clothing.  Whatever she had in the
way of money and valuables she'd carried off.  And so Hannaford came
home, considerably down in the mouth, and he had to stand a good deal
of chaff.  And if he found this woman's picture in a recent
paper--well, small wonder that he did cut it out!  I should say he was
probably going to set Scotland Yard on her track!--for, of course,
there's no time-limit to criminal proceedings."

"This is the picture he cut out," observed Hetherwick, producing it
from his pocket-book.  "But you say you never saw the woman?"

"No, I never saw her," assented Hollis, examining the print with
interested curiosity.  "So, of course, I can't recognise this.
Handsome woman!  But you meet me at my office--close by--to-morrow
morning, at ten, and I'll take you to our police-station.  Gandham will
know!"

Gandham, an elderly man with a sphinx-like manner and watchful eyes,
laughed sardonically when Hollis explained Hetherwick's business.  He
laughed again when Hetherwick showed him the print.

"Oh, aye, that's the lady!" he exclaimed.  "Not changed much, neither!
Egad, she was a smart 'un, that, Mr. Hollis!--I often laugh when I
think how she did Hannaford!  But you know, Hannaford was a
soft-hearted man.  At these little affairs, he was always for sparing
people's feelings.  All very well--but he had to pay for trying to
spare hers!  Aye, that's her!  We have a portrait of her here, you
know."

"You have, eh?" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "I should like to see it."

"You can see it with pleasure, sir," replied the detective.  "And look
at it as long as you like."  He turned to a desk close by and produced
a big album, full of portraits with written particulars beneath them.
"This is not, strictly speaking, a police photo," he continued.  "It's
not one that we took ourselves, ye understand--we never had the chance!
No!--but when my lady was staying at the 'White Bear,' she had her
portrait taken by Wintring, the photographer, in Silver Street, and
Wintring was that suited with it that he put it in his window.  So, of
course, when her ladyship popped off with Malladale's necklace, we got
one of those portraits, and added it to our little collection.  Here it
is!--and you'll not notice so much difference between it and that
you've got in your hand, sir."

There was very little difference between the two photographs, and
Hetherwick said so.  And presently he went away from the police-office
wondering more than ever about the woman with whose past adventures he
was concerning himself.

"May as well do the thing thoroughly while you're about it," remarked
Hollis, as they walked off.  "Come and see Malladale--his shop is only
round the corner.  Not that he can tell you much more than I've told
you already."

But Malladale proved himself able to tell a great deal more.  A grave,
elderly man, presiding over an establishment which Hetherwick,
unaccustomed to the opulence of provincial manufacturing towns, was
astonished to find outside London, he ushered his visitor into a
private room, and listened to the reasons they gave for calling on him.
After a close and careful inspection of the print which Hetherwick put
before him, he handed it back with a confident nod.

"There is no doubt whatever--in my mind--that that is a print from a
photograph of the woman I knew as the Honourable Mrs. Whittingham," he
said.  "And if it has been taken recently, she has altered very little
during the ten years that have elapsed since she was here in this town."

"You'd be glad to see her again, Mr. Malladale--in the flesh?" laughed
Hollis.

The jeweller shook his head.

"I think not," he answered.  "No, I think not, Mr. Hollis.  That's an
episode which I had put out of my mind--until you recalled it."

"But--your loss?" suggested Hollis.  "Close on four thousand pounds,
wasn't it?"

Mr. Malladale raised one of his white hands to his grey beard and
coughed.  It was a cough that suggested discretion, confidence,
secrecy.  He smiled behind his moustache, and his spectacled eyes
seemed to twinkle.

"I think I may venture a little disclosure--in the company of two
gentlemen learned in the law," he said.  "To a solicitor whom I know
very well, and to a barrister introduced by him, I think I may reveal a
little secret--between ourselves and to go no further.  The fact of
this matter is, gentlemen--I had no loss!"

"What?" exclaimed Hollis.  "No--loss?"

"Eventually," replied the jeweller.  "Eventually!  Indeed, to tell you
the truth plain, I made my profit, and--er, something over."

Hollis looked his bewilderment.

"Do you mean that--eventually--you were paid?" he asked.

"Precisely!  Eventually--after a considerable interval--I was paid,"
replied Mr. Malladale.  "I will tell you the circumstances.  It is, I
believe, common knowledge that I sold the diamond necklace to Mrs.
Whittingham for three thousand, nine hundred pounds, and that the
cheque she gave me was dishonoured, and that she cleared off with the
goods and was never heard of after she escaped from Hannaford.  Well,
two years ago, that is to say, eight years after her disappearance, I
one day received a letter which bore the New York postmark.  It
contained a sheet of notepaper on which were a few words and a few
figures.  But I have that now, and I'll show it to you."

Going to a safe in the corner of his parlour, the jeweller, after some
searching, produced a paper and laid it before his visitors.
Hetherwick examined it with curiosity.  There was no name, no address,
no date; all that appeared was, as Malladale had remarked, a few words,
a few figures, typewritten:--

  Principal  . . . . . . . . . . 3,900
  8 years' Interest @ 5% . . . .  1,560
                                 ------
                                 5,460

  Draft 5,460 enclosed herein: kindly acknowledge in
  London _Times_.


"Enclosed, as is there said, was a draft on a London bank for the
specified amount," continued Mr. Malladale.  "5,460!  You may easily
believe that at first I could scarcely understand this: I knew of no
one in New York who owed me money.  But the first
figures--3,900--threw light on the matter--I suddenly remembered Mrs.
Whittingham and my lost necklace.  Then I saw through the
thing--evidently Mrs. Whittingham had become prosperous, wealthy, and
she was honest enough to make amends; there was my principal, and eight
years' interest on it.  Yet, I felt somewhat doubtful about taking
it--I didn't know whether I mightn't be compounding a felony?  You
gentlemen, of course, will appreciate my little difficulty?"

"Um!" remarked Hollis in a non-committal tone.  "The more interesting
matter is--what did you do?  Though I think we already know," he added
with a smile.

"Well, I went to see Hannaford, and told him what I had received,"
answered the jeweller.  "And Hannaford said precisely what I expected
him to say.  He said 'Put the money in your pocket, Malladale, and say
nothing about it!'  So--I did!"

"Each of you feeling pretty certain that Mrs. Whittingham was not
likely to show her face in Sellithwaite again, no doubt!" observed
Hollis.  "Very interesting, Mr. Malladale.  But it strikes me that
whether she ever comes to Sellithwaite again or not, Mrs. Whittingham,
or whatever her name may be nowadays, is in England."

"You think so?" asked the jeweller.

"Her picture's recently appeared in an English paper, anyway," said
Hollis.

"But pictures of famous American ladies appear in English newspapers,"
suggested Mr. Malladale.  "I have recollections of several.  Now my
notion is that Mrs. Whittingham, who was a very handsome and very
charming woman, eventually went across the Atlantic and married an
American millionaire!  That's how I figured it.  And I have often
wondered who she is now."

"That's precisely what I want to find out," said Hetherwick.  "One
thing is certain--Hannaford knew!  If he'd been alive he could have
told us.  Because in whatever paper it was that this print appeared
there would be some letterpress about it, giving the name, and why it
appeared at all."

"You can trace that," remarked Hollis.

"Just so," agreed Hetherwick, "and I may as well get back to town and
begin the job.  But I think with Mr. Hollis," he added, turning to the
jeweller, "I believe that the woman is here in England: I think it
possible, too, that Hannaford knew where.  And I don't think it
impossible that between the time of his cutting out her picture from
the paper and the time of his sudden death he came in touch with her."

"You think it probable that she, in some way, had something to do with
his murder--if it was murder?" asked Mr. Malladale.

"I think it possible," replied Hetherwick.  "There are strange features
in the case.  One of the strangest is this.  Why, when Hannaford cut
out that picture, for his own purposes, evidently with no intention of
showing it to anyone else, did he cut it out without the name and
letterpress which must have been under and over it?"

"Queer, certainly!" said Hollis.  "But, you know, you can soon
ascertain what that name was.  All you've got to do is to get another
copy of the paper."

"Unfortunately, Hannaford's granddaughter doesn't know what particular
paper it was," replied Hetherwick.  "Her sole recollection of it is
that it was some local newspaper, sent to Hannaford by post, the very
morning that he left here for London."

"Still--it can be traced," said Hollis.  "It was in some paper---and
there'll be other copies."

Presently he and Hetherwick left the jeweller's shop.  Outside, Hollis
led his companion across the street, and turned into a narrow alley.

"I'll show you a man who'll remember Mrs. Whittingham better than
anybody in Sellithwaite," he said, with a laugh.  "Better even than
Malladale.  I told you she stayed at the 'White Bear' when she was
here?  Well, since then the entire staff of that eminent hostelry has
been changed, from the manager to the boots--I don't think there's a
man or woman there who was there ten years ago.  But there's a man at
the end of this passage who was formerly hall-porter at the 'White
Bear'--Amblet Hudson--and who now keeps a rather cosy little saloon-bar
down here: we'll drop in on him.  He's what we call a bit of a
character, and if you can get him to talk, he's usually worth listening
to."




CHAPTER VI

SAMPLES OF INK

Hollis led the way farther along the alley, between high, black,
windowless walls, and suddenly turning into a little court, paused
before a door set deep in the side of an old half-timbered house.

"Queer old place, this!" he remarked over his shoulder.  "But you'll
get a glass of as good port or sherry from this chap as you'd get
anywhere in England--he knows his customers!  Come in."

He led the way into a place the like of which Hetherwick had never
seen--a snug, cosy room, panelled and raftered in old oak, with a
bright fire burning in an open hearth and the flicker of its flames
dancing on the old brass and pewter that ornamented the walls.  There
was a small bar-counter on one side of it; and behind this, in his
shirt-sleeves, and with a cigar protruding from the corner of a pair of
clean-shaven, humorous lips, stood a keen-eyed man, busily engaged in
polishing wine-glasses.

"Good morning, gentlemen!" he said heartily.  "Nice morning, Mr.
Hollis, for the time o' year.  And what can I do for you and your
friend, sir?"

Hollis glanced round the room--empty, save for themselves.  He drew a
stool to the bar and motioned Hetherwick to follow his example.

"I think we'll try your very excellent dry sherry, Hudson," he
answered.  "That is, if it's as good as it was last time I tasted it."

"Always up to standard, Mr. Hollis, always up to standard, sir!"
replied the bar-keeper.  "No inferior qualities, no substitutes, and no
trading on past reputation in this establishment, gentlemen!  As good a
glass of dry sherry here, sir, as you'd get where sherry wine comes
from--and you can't say that of most places in England, I think.
Everything's of the best here, Mr. Hollis--as you know!"

Hollis responded with a little light chaff; suddenly he bent across the
bar.

"Hudson!" he said confidentially.  "My friend here has something he'd
like to show you.  Now, then," he continued, as Hetherwick, in response
to this, had produced the picture, "do you recognise that?"

The bar-keeper put on a pair of spectacles and turned the picture to
the light, examining it closely.  His lips tightened; then relaxed in a
cynical smile.

"Aye!" he said, half carelessly.  "It's the woman that did old
Malladale out of that diamond necklace.  Of course!--Mistress
Whittingham!"

"Would you know her again, if you met her--now?" asked Hollis.

The bar-keeper picked up one of his glasses and began a vigorous
polishing.

"Aye!" he answered, laconically.  "And I should know her by something
else than her face!"

Just then two men came in, and Hudson broke off to attend to their
wants.  But presently they carried their glasses away to a snug corner
near the fire, and the bar-keeper once more turned to Hollis and
Hetherwick.

"Aye!" he said confidentially.  "If need were, I could tell that party
by something else than her face, handsome as that is!  I used to tell
Hannaford when he was busy trying to find her that if he'd any
difficulty about making certain, I could identify her if nobody else
could!  You see, I saw a deal of her when she was stopping at the
'White Bear.'  And I knew something that nobody else knew."

"What is it?" asked Hetherwick.

Hudson leaned closer across the counter and lowered his voice.

"She was a big, handsome woman, this Mrs. Whittingham," he continued.
"Very showy, dressy woman; fond of fine clothes and jewellery, and so
on; sort of woman, you know, that would attract attention anywhere.
And one of these women, too, that was evidently used to being waited on
hand and foot--she took her money's worth out of the 'White Bear,' I
can tell you!  I did a deal for her, one way or another, and I'll say
this for her: she was free enough with her money.  If it so happened
that she wanted things doing for her, she kept you fairly on the go
till they were done, but she threw five-shilling pieces and half-crowns
about as if they were farthings!  She'd send you to take a sixpenny
telegram and give you a couple of shillings for taking it.  Well, now,
as I say, I saw a deal of her, one way and another, getting cabs for
her, and taking things up to her room, and doing this, that, and
t'other.  And it was with going up there one day sudden-like, with a
telegram that had just come, that I found out something about
her--something that, as I say, I could have told her by anywhere, even
if she could have changed her face and put a wig on!"

"Aye--and what, now?" asked Hollis.

"This!" answered Hudson with a knowing look.  "Maybe I'm a noticing
sort of chap--anyhow, there was a thing I always noticed about Mrs.
Whittingham.  Wherever she was, and no matter how she was dressed,
whether it was in her going-out things or her dinner finery, she always
wore a band of black velvet round her right forearm, just above the
wrist, where women wear bracelets.  In fact, it was a sort of bracelet,
a strip, as I say, of black velvet, happen about two inches wide, and
on the front a cameo ornament, the size of a shilling, white stone or
something of that sort, with one of these heathen figures carved on it.
There were other folk about the place noticed that black velvet band,
too--I tell you she was never seen without it; the chambermaids said
she slept with it on.  But on the occasion I'm telling you about, when
I went up to her room with a telegram, I caught her without it.  She
opened her door to see who knocked--she was in a dressing-gown, going
to change for dinner, I reckon, and she held out her right hand for
what I'd brought her.  The black velvet band wasn't on it, and for just
a second like I saw what was on her arm!"

"Yes?" said Hollis.  "Something--remarkable?"

"For a lady--aye!" replied Hudson, with a grim laugh.  "Her arm was
tattooed!  Right round the place where she always wore this black
velvet band there was a snake, red and green, and yellow, and blue,
with its tail in its mouth!--wonderfully done, too; it had been no
novice that had done that bit of work, I can tell you!  Of course, I
just saw it, and no more, but there was a strong electric light close
by, and I did see it, and saw it plain and all.  And that's a thing
that that woman, whoever she may be, and wherever she's got to, can
never rub off, nor scrub off!--she'll carry that to the day of her
death."

The two listeners looked at each other.

"Odd!" remarked Hollis.

Hetherwick turned to the bar-keeper.

"Did she notice that you saw that her arm was tattooed?" he asked.

"Nay, I don't think she did," replied Hudson.  "Of course, the thing
was over in a second.  I made no sign that I'd seen aught particular,
and she said nought.  But--I saw!"

Just then other customers came in, and the bar-keeper turned away to
attend to their wants.  Hollis and Hetherwick moved from the counter to
one of the snug corners at the farther end of the room.

"Whoever she may be, wherever she may be--as Hudson said just now,"
remarked Hollis, "and if this woman really had anything to do with the
mysterious circumstances of Hannaford's death, she ought not to be
difficult to find.  A woman who carries an indefaceable mark like that
on her arm, and whose picture has recently appeared in a newspaper,
should easily be traced."

"I think I shall get at her through the picture," agreed Hetherwick.
"The newspaper production seems to have been done from a photograph
which, from its clearness and finish, was probably taken by some
first-class firm in London.  I shall go round such firms as soon as I
get back.  It may be, of course, that she's nothing whatever to do with
Hannaford's murder, but still, it's a trail that's got to be followed
to the end now that one's started out on it.  Well! that seems to
finish my business here--as far as she's concerned.  But there's
another matter--I told you that when Hannaford came to town he had on
him a sealed packet containing the secret of some invention or
discovery, and that it's strangely and unaccountably missing.  His
granddaughter says that he worked this thing out--whatever it is--in a
laboratory that he had in his garden.  Now then, before I go I want to
see that laboratory.  As he's only recently left the place, I suppose
things will still be pretty much as he left them at his old house.
Where did he live?"

"He lived on the outskirts of the town," replied Hollis.  "An
old-fashioned house that he bought some years ago--I know it by sight
well enough, though I've never been in it.  I don't suppose it's let
yet, though I know it's being advertised in the local papers.  Let's
get some lunch at the 'White Bear,' and then we'll drive up there and
see what we can do.  You want to get an idea of what it was that
Hannaford had invented?"

"Just so," assented Hetherwick.  "If the secret was worth all that he
told his granddaughter it was, he may have been murdered by somebody
who wanted to get sole possession of it.  Anyway, it's another trail
that's got to be worked on."

"I never heard of Hannaford as an inventor or experimenter," remarked
Hollis.  "But there, I knew little about him, except in his official
capacity: he and his granddaughter, and an elderly woman they kept as a
working housekeeper, were quiet sort of folk.  I knew that he brought
up his granddaughter from infancy, and gave her a rattling good
education at the Girls' High School, but beyond that, I know little of
their private affairs.  I suppose he amused himself in this laboratory
you speak of in his spare time?"

"Dabbled in chemistry, I understand," said Hetherwick.  "And, if it
hasn't been dismantled, we may find something in that laboratory that
will give us a clue of some sort."

Hollis seemed to reflect for a minute or two.

"I've an idea!" he said suddenly.  "There's a man who lunches at the
'White Bear' every day--a man named Collison; he's analytical chemist
to a big firm of dyers in the town.  I've seen him in conversation with
Hannaford now and then.  Perhaps he could tell us something on this
point.  Come on!  this is just about his time for lunch."

A few minutes later, in the coffee-room of the hotel, Hollis led
Hetherwick up to a bearded and spectacled man who had just sat down to
lunch, and having introduced him, briefly detailed the object of his
visit to Sellithwaite.  Collison nodded and smiled.

"I understand," he said, as they seated themselves at his table.
"Hannaford did dabble a bit in chemistry--in quite an amateur way.  But
as to inventing anything that was worth all that--come!  Still, he was
an ingenious man, for an amateur, and he may have hit on something
fairly valuable."

"You've no idea what he was after?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Of late, no!  But some time ago he was immensely interested in aniline
dyes," replied Collison.  "He used to talk to me about them.  That's a
subject of infinite importance in this district.  Of course, as I dare
say you know, the Germans have been vastly ahead of us as regards
aniline dyes, and we've got most, if not all, of the stuff used, from
Germany.  Hannaford used to worry himself as to why we couldn't make
our own aniline dyes, and I believe he experimented.  But, with his
resources, as an amateur, of course, that was hopeless."

"I've sometimes seen him talking to you," observed Hollis.  "You've no
idea what he was after, of late?"

"No.  He used to ask me technical questions," answered Collison.  "You
know, I just regarded him as a man who had a natural taste for
experimenting with things.  This was evidently his hobby.  I used to
chaff him about it.  Still, he was a purposeful man, and by reading and
experiment he'd picked up a lot of knowledge."

"And, I suppose, it's within the bounds of possibility that he had hit
on something of practical value?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Oh, quite within such bounds!--and he may have done," agreed Collison.
"I've known of much greater amateurs suddenly discovering something.
The question then is--do they know enough to turn their discovery to
any practical purpose and account?"

"Evidently, from what he told his granddaughter, Hannaford did think he
knew enough," said Hetherwick.  "What I want to find out from a visit
to his old laboratory is--what had he discovered?"

"And as you're not a chemist, nor even a dabbler," remarked Hollis,
with a laugh, "that won't be easy!  You'd better come with us after
lunch, Collison."

"I can give you a couple of hours," assented Collison.  "I'm already
curious--especially if any discovery we can make tends to throw light
on the mystery of Hannaford's death.  Pity the police haven't got hold
of the man who was with him," he added, glancing at Hetherwick.  "I
suppose you could identify him?"

"Unless he's an absolute adept at disguising himself, yes--positively!"
replied Hetherwick.  "He was a noticeable man."

An hour later the three men drove up to a house which stood a little
way out of the town, on the edge of the moorland that stretched towards
the great range of hills on the west.  The house, an old-fashioned,
solitary place, was empty, save for a caretaker who had been installed
in its back rooms to keep it aired and to show it to possible tenants.
The laboratory, a stone-walled, timber-roofed shed at the end of the
garden, had never been opened, said the caretaker, since Mr. Hannaford
locked it up and left it.  But the key was speedily forthcoming, and
the three visitors entered and looked round, each with different
valuings of what he saw.

The whole place was a wilderness of litter and untidiness.  Whatever
Hannaford had possessed in the way of laboratory plant and appliances
had been removed, and now there was little but rubbish--glass, whole
and broken, paper, derelict boxes and crates, odds and ends of
wreckage--to look at.  But the analytical chemist glanced about him
with a knowing eye, examining bottles and boxes, picking up a thing
here and another there, and before long he turned to his companions
with a laugh, pointing at the same time to a table in a corner which
was covered with and dust-lined pots.

"It's very easy to see what Hannaford was after!" he said.  "He's been
trying to evolve a new ink!"

"Ink!" exclaimed Hollis incredulously.  "Aren't there plenty of inks on
the market?"

"No end!" agreed Collison with another laugh, and again pointing to the
table.  "These are specimens of all the better-known ones--British, of
course, for no really decent ink is made elsewhere.  But even the very
best ink, up to now, isn't perfect.  Hannaford perhaps thought, being
an amateur, that he could make a better than the known best.
Ink!--that's what he's been after.  A superior, perfectly-fluid,
penetrating, permanent, non-corrosive writing-ink--that's been his
notion, a thousand to one!  I observe the presence of lots of stuffs
that he's used."

He showed them various things, explaining their properties and adding
some remarks on the history of the manufacture of writing-inks during
the last hundred years.

"Taking it altogether," he concluded, "and in spite of manufacturers'
advertisements and boasting, there isn't a really absolutely perfect
writing-fluid on the market--that I know of, anyway.  If Hannaford
thought he could make one, and succeeded, well, I'd be glad to have his
formula!  Money in it!"

"To the extent of a hundred thousand pounds?" asked Hetherwick,
remembering what Rhona had told him.  "All that?"

"Oh, well!" laughed Collison, "you must remember that inventors are
always very sanguine; always apt to see everything through
rose-coloured spectacles; invariably prone to exaggerate the merits of
their inventions.  But if Hannaford, by experiment, really hit on a
first-class formula for making a writing-ink superior in all the
necessary qualities to its rivals--yes, there'd be a pot of money in
it.  No doubt of that!"

"I suppose he'd have to take out a patent for his invention?" suggested
Hetherwick.

"Oh, to be sure!  I should think that was one of his reasons for going
to London--to see after it." assented Collison.  He looked round again,
and again laughed.  "Well," he said, "I think you know now--you may be
confident about it from what I've seen here--what Hannaford was after!
Ink--just ink!"

Hetherwick accepted this judgment, and when he left Sellithwaite later
in the afternoon on his return journey to London, he summed up the
results of his visit.  They were two.  First, he had discovered that
the woman of whom Hannaford had spoken in the train was a person who
ten years before had been known as Mrs. Whittingham, appeared to be
some sort of an adventuress, and, in spite of her restitution to the
jeweller whom she had defrauded, was still liable to arrest,
conviction, and punishment--if she could be found.  Second, he had
found out that the precious invention of which Hannaford had spoken so
confidently and enthusiastically to his granddaughter and the
particulars of which had mysteriously disappeared, related to the
manufacture of a new writing-ink, which might, in truth, prove a very
valuable commercial asset.  So far, so good; he was finding things out.
As he ate his dinner in the restaurant car he considered his next
steps.  But it needed little consideration to resolve on them.  He must
find out all about the woman whose picture lay in his pocketbook--what
she now called herself; where she was; how her photograph came to be
reproduced in a newspaper; and, last, but far from least, if Hannaford,
after seeing the reproduction, had got into touch with her or given
information about her.  To the man in the train Hannaford had remarked
that he had said nothing about her until that evening--yes, but was
that man the only man to whom he had spoken?  So much for that--and the
next thing was to find out somehow what had become of the sealed packet
which Hannaford undoubtedly had on him when he went out of Malter's
Hotel on the night of his death.




CHAPTER VII

BLACK VELVET

Next morning, and before calling on either Kenthwaite or Rhona
Hannaford, Hetherwick set out on a tour of the fashionable
photographers in the West End of London.  After all, there were not so
many of them, so many at any rate of the very famous ones.  He made a
hit and began to work methodically.  His first few coverts were drawn
blank, but just before noon, and as he was thinking of knocking off for
lunch, he started his fox.  In a palatial establishment in Bond Street
the person to whom he applied, showing his picture, gave an immediate
smile of recognition.

"You want to know who is the original of this?" he said.  "Certainly!
Lady Riversreade, of Riversreade Court, near Dorking."

Hetherwick had no deep acquaintance with Debrett nor with Burke, nor
even with the list of peers, baronets and knights given in the ordinary
reference books, and to him the name of Lady Riversreade was absolutely
unknown--he had never heard of her.  But the man to whom he had shown
the print, and who now held it in his hand, seemed to consider that
Lady Riversreade was, or should be, as well known to everybody as she
evidently was to him.

"This print is from one of our photographs of Lady Riversreade," he
said, turning to a side table in the reception-room in which they were
standing and picking up a framed portrait.  "This one."

"Then you probably know in what newspaper this print appeared?"
suggested Hetherwick.  "That's really what I'm desirous of finding out."

"Oh, it appeared in several," answered the photographer.  "Recently.
It was about the time that Lady Riversreade opened some home or
institute--I forget what.  There was an account of it in the papers,
and naturally her portrait was reproduced."

Hetherwick made a plausible prearranged excuse for his curiosity, and
went away.  Lady Riversreade!--evidently some woman of rank, or means,
or position.  But was she identical with the Mrs. Whittingham of ten
years ago--the Mrs. Whittingham who did the Sellithwaite jeweller out
of a necklace worth nearly four thousand pounds and cleverly escaped
arrest at the hands of Hannaford?  And if so...

But that led to indefinite vistas; the main thing at present was to
find out all that could be found out about Lady Riversreade, of
Riversreade Court, near Dorking.  Hetherwick could doubtless have
obtained considerable information from the fashionable photographer,
but he had carefully refrained from showing too much inquisitiveness.
Moreover, he knew a man, one Boxley, a fellow club-member, who was
always fully posted up in all the doings of the social and fashionable
world and could, if he would, tell him everything about Lady
Riversreade--that was, if there was anything to tell about her.  Boxley
was one of those bachelor men about town who went everywhere, knew
everybody, and kept himself fully informed; he invariably lunched at
this particular club, the Junior Megatherium, and thither Hetherwick
presently proceeded, bent on finding him.

He was fortunate in running Boxley to earth almost as soon as he
entered the sacred and exclusive portals.  Boxley was lunching and
there was no one else at his table.  Hetherwick joined him, and began
the usual small talk about nothing in particular.  But he soon came to
his one point.

"Look here!" he said, at a convenient interval.  "I want to ask you
something.  You know everybody and everything.  Who is Lady
Riversreade, who's recently opened some home or institution, or
hospital or something?"

"One of the richest women in England!" replied Boxley promptly.  "Worth
a couple of millions or so.  That's who she is--who she was, I don't
know.  Don't suppose anybody else does, either.  In this country,
anyhow."

"What, is she a foreigner, then?" asked Hetherwick.  "I've seen her
portrait in the papers--that's why I asked you who she is.  Doesn't
look foreign, I think."

"I can tell you all that is known about her," said Boxley, "and that's
not much.  She's the widow of old Sir John Riversreade, the famous
contractor--the man who made a pot of money building railways, and dams
across big rivers, and that sort of thing, and got a knighthood for it.
He also built himself a magnificent place near Dorking, and called it
Riversreade Court--just the type of place a modern millionaire would
build.  Now, old Sir John had been a bachelor all his life, until he
was over sixty--no time for anything but his contracts, you know.  But
when he was about sixty-five, which would be some six or seven years
ago, he went over to the United States and made a rather lengthy stay
there.  And when he returned he brought a wife with him--the lady
you're inquiring about."

"American, then?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Well, he married her over there, certainly," said Boxley.  "But I
should say she isn't American."

"You've met her--personally?"

"Just.  Run across her once or twice at various affairs, and been
introduced to her, quite casually.  No, I don't think she's American.
If I wanted to label her, I should say she was cosmopolitan."

"Woman of the world, eh?"

"Decidedly so.  Handsome woman--self-possessed--self-assured--smart,
clever.  I think she'll know how to take care of the money her husband
left her."

"Leave her everything?"

"Every penny!--except some inconsiderable legacies to charitable
institutions.  It was said at the time--it's two years since the old
chap died--that she's got over two millions."

"And this institution, or whatever it is?"

"Oh, that!  That was in the papers not so long since."

"I'm no great reader of newspapers.  What about it?"

"Oh, she's started a home for wounded officers near Riversreade Court.
There was some big country house near there empty--couldn't really be
sold or let.  She bought it, renovated it, fitted it up, stuck a staff
of nurses and servants in, and got it blessed by the War Office.  Jolly
nice place, I believe, and she pays the piper."

"Doing the benevolent business, eh?"

"So it appears.  Easy game, too, when you've got a couple of millions
behind you.  Useful, though."

Boxley went away soon after that, and Hetherwick, wondering about what
he had learned, and now infinitely inquisitive about the identity of
Lady Riversreade with Mrs. Whittingham, went into the smoking-room, and
more from habit than because he really wanted to see it, picked up a
copy of _The Times_.  Almost the first thing on which his glance
lighted was the name that was just then in his thoughts--there it was,
in capitals, at the head of an advertisement:


"LADY RIVERSREADE'S HOME FOR WOUNDED OFFICERS, SURREY.--Required at
once a Resident Lady-Secretary, fully competent to undertake accounts
and correspondence and thoroughly trained in shorthand and typewriting;
a knowledge of French and German would be a high recommendation.
Application should be made personally any day this week between 10.0
and 12.0 and 3.0 and 5.0 to Lady Riversreade, Riversreade Court,
Dorking."


Hetherwick threw the paper aside, left the club, and at the first
newsagent's he came to bought another copy.  With this in his hand he
jumped into a taxi-cab and set off for Surrey Street, wondering if he
would find Rhona Hannaford still at Malter's Hotel.  He was fortunate
in that--she had not yet left--and in a few minutes he was giving her a
full and detailed account of his doings since his last interview with
her.  She listened to his story about Sellithwaite and his discoveries
of that morning with a slightly puzzled look.

"Why are you taking all this trouble?" she asked suddenly and abruptly.
"You're doing more, going into things more, than the police are.
Matherfield was here this morning to tell me, he said, how they were
getting on.  They aren't getting on at all!--they haven't made one
single discovery; they've heard nothing, found out nothing, about the
man in the train or the man at Victoria--they're just where they were.
But you--you've found out a lot!  Why are you so energetic about it?"

"Put it down to professional inquisitiveness, if you like," answered
Hetherwick, smiling.  "I'm--interested.  Tremendously!  You see--I,
too, was there in the train, like the man they haven't found.  Well,
now--now that I've got to this point I've arrived at, I want you to
take a hand."

"I?  In what way?" exclaimed Rhona.

Hetherwick pulled out _The Times_ and pointed to the advertisement.

"I want you to go down to Dorking to-morrow morning and personally
interview Lady Riversreade in response to that," he said.  "You've all
the qualifications she specifies, so you've an excellent excuse for
calling on her.  Whether you'd care to take the post is another
matter--what I want is that you should see her under conditions that
will enable you to observe her closely."

"Why?" asked Rhona.

"I want you to see if she wears such a band as that which Hudson told
Hollis and myself about," replied Hetherwick.  "Sharp eyes like yours
will soon see that.  And--if she does, then she's Mrs. Whittingham!  In
that case, I might ask you to do more--still more."

"What, for instance?" she inquired.

"Well, to do your best to get this post," he answered.  "I think that
you, with your qualifications, could get it."

"And--your object in that?" she asked.

"To keep an eye on Lady Riversreade," he replied promptly.  "If the
Mrs. Whittingham of ten years ago at Sellithwaite is the same woman as
the Lady Riversreade of Riversreade Court of to-day, then, in view of
your grandfather's murder, I want to know a lot more about her!  To
have you--there!--would be an immense help."

"I'm to be a sort of spy, eh?" asked Rhona.

"Detective, if you like," assented Hetherwick.  "Why not?"

"You forget this," she remarked.  "If this Lady Riversreade is
identical with the Mrs. Whittingham of ten years ago, she'd remember my
name--Hannaford!  She's not likely to have forgotten Superintendent
Hannaford of Sellithwaite!"

"Exactly--but I've thought of that little matter," replied Hetherwick.
"Call yourself by some other name.  Your mother's, for instance."

"That was Featherstone," said Rhona.

"There you are!  Go as Miss Featherstone.  As for your address, give
your aunt's address at Tooting.  Easy enough, you see," laughed
Hetherwick.  "Once you begin it properly."

"There's another thing, though," she objected.  "References!  She'll
want those."

"Just as easy," answered Hetherwick.  "Give me as one and Kenthwaite as
the other.  I'll speak to him about it.  Two barristers of the Middle
Temple!--excellent!  Come!--all you've got to do is to work the scheme
out fully and carry it out with assurance, and you don't know what we
might discover."

Rhona considered matters awhile, watching him steadily.

"You think that--somehow--this woman may be at the back of the mystery
surrounding my grandfather's murder?" she suddenly asked.

"I think it's quite within the bounds of probability," he answered.

"All right," she said abruptly.  "I'll go.  To-morrow morning, I
suppose?"

"Sooner the better," agreed Hetherwick.  "And, look here, I'll go down
with you.  We'll go by the 10.10 from Victoria, drive to this place,
and I'll wait outside while you have your interview.  After that we'll
get some lunch in Dorking--and you can tell me your news."

Next morning found Hetherwick pacing the platform at Victoria and on
the look-out for his fellow-companion.  She came to him a little before
the train was due to leave, and he noticed at once that she had
discarded the mourning garments in which he had found her the previous
afternoon; she now appeared in a smart tailor-made coat and skirt, and
looked the part he wanted her to assume--that of a capable and
self-reliant young business woman.

"Good!" he said approvingly, as they went to find their seats.
"Nothing like dressing up to it.  You're all ready with your lines,
eh?--I mean, you've settled on all you're going to say and do?"

"Leave that to me," she answered with a laugh, "I shan't forget the
primary object, anyway.  But I've been wondering--supposing we come to
the conclusion that this Lady Riversreade is the Mrs. Whittingham of
ten years ago?  What are you going to do then?"

"My ideas are hazy on that point--at present," confessed Hetherwick.
"The first thing, surely, is to establish identity.  Don't forget that
the main thing to do at Riversreade Court is to get a good look at Lady
Riversreade's right wrist, and see what's on it!"

Riversreade Court proved to be some distance from Dorking, in the Leith
Hill district; Hetherwick charted a taxi-cab and gave his companion
final instructions as they rode out.  Half an hour's run brought them
to the house--a big, pretentious, imitation Elizabethan structure, set
on the hill-side amongst a grove of firs and pines, and having an
ornamental park laid out between its gardens and terraces and the high
road.  At the lodge gates he stopped the driver and got out.

"I'll wait here for you," he said to Rhona.  "You ride up to the house,
get your business done, and come back here.  Be watchful now--of
anything."

Rhona nodded reassuringly and went off; Hetherwick lighted his pipe and
strolled about admiring the scenery.  But his thoughts were with Rhona;
he was wondering what adventures she was having in the big mansion
which the late contractor had built amidst the woods.  And Rhona kept
him wondering some time; an hour had elapsed before the cab came back.
With a hand on its door, he turned to the driver:

"Go to the 'White Horse' now," he said.  "We'll lunch there, and
afterwards you can take us to the station.  Well?" he continued, as he
got in and seated himself at Rhona's side.  "What luck?"

"Good, I should say," answered Rhona.  "She wears a broad black velvet
band on her right wrist, and on the outer face is a small cameo.  How's
that?"

"Precisely!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Just what that bar-keeper chap at
Sellithwaite described.  Wears it openly--makes no attempt at
concealment beneath her sleeve, eh?"

"None," answered Rhona.  "She was wearing a smart, fashionable,
short-sleeved jumper.  She'd a very fine diamond bracelet on the other
wrist."

"And she herself," asked Hetherwick.  "What sort of woman is she?"

"That's a very good photograph of her that my grandfather cut out of
the paper," replied Rhona.  "Very good, indeed!  I knew her at once.
She's a tall, fine, handsome, well-preserved woman, perhaps forty,
perhaps less.  Very easy, accustomed manner; a regular woman of the
world I should think.  Quite ready to talk about herself and her
doings--she told me the whole history of this Home she's started and
took me to see it--it's a fine old house, much more attractive than the
Court, a little way along the hillside.  She told me that it was her
great hobby, and that she's devoting all her time to it.  I should say
that she's genuinely interested in its welfare--genuinely!"

"She impressed you?" suggested Hetherwick.

"I think, from what I saw and heard, that she's a good-natured,
probably warm-hearted, woman.  She spoke very feelingly of the patients
she's got in her Home, anyhow."

"And the post--the secretaryship?"

"I can have it if I want it--of course, I told her I did.  She examined
me pretty closely about my qualifications--she herself speaks French
and German like a native--and I mentioned you and Mr. Kenthwaite as
references.  She's going to write to you both to-day.  So--it's for you
to decide."

"I suppose it's really for you!"

"No!--I'm willing, eager, indeed, to do anything to clear up the
mystery about my grandfather's murder.  But--I don't think this woman
had anything to do with it.  In my opinion--and I suppose I've got some
feminine intuition--she's honest and straightforward enough."

"And yet it looks as if she were certainly the Mrs. Whittingham who did
a Sellithwaite jeweller to the tune of four thousand pounds!" laughed
Hetherwick.  "That wasn't very honest or straightforward!"

"I've been thinking about that," said Rhona.  "Perhaps, after all, she
really thought the cheque would be met, and anyway, she did send the
man his money, even though it was a long time afterwards.  And
again--an important matter!--Lady Riversreade may not be Mrs.
Whittingham at all.  More women than one wear wristlets of velvet."

"But--the portrait!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "The positive identity!"

"Well," answered Rhona, "I'm willing to go there and to try to find out
more.  But, frankly, I think Lady Riversreade's all right!  First
impression, anyhow!"

The cab drew up at the "White Horse," and Hetherwick led Rhona into the
coffee-room.  But they had hardly taken their seats when the manager
came in.

"Does your name happen to be Hetherwick, sir?" he inquired.  "Just
so--thank you.  A Mr. Mapperley has twice rung you up here during the
last hour--he's on the phone again now, if you'll speak to him."

"I'll come," said Hetherwick.  "That's my clerk," he murmured to Rhona
as he rose.  "I told him to ring me up here between twelve and three if
necessary.  Back in a minute."

But he was away several minutes, and when he came to her again, his
face was grave.  "Here's a new development!" he said, bending across
the table and whispering.  "The police have found the man who was with
your grandfather in the train!  Matherfield wants me to identify him.
And you'll gather from that that they've found him dead!  We must lunch
quickly and catch the two-twenty-four."




CHAPTER VIII

FLIGWOOD'S RENTS

Hetherwick went to the hotel telephone again before he had finished his
lunch, and as a result Matherfield was on the platform at Victoria when
the two-twenty-four ran in.  He showed no surprise at seeing Hetherwick
and Rhona together; his manifest concern was to get Hetherwick to
himself and away from the station.  And Hetherwick, seeing this, said
good-bye to Rhona with a whispered word that he would look in at
Malter's Hotel before evening; a few minutes later he and Matherfield
were in a taxi-cab together, hastening along Buckingham Palace Road.

"Well?" inquired Hetherwick.  "This man?"

"I don't think there's any doubt about his being the man you saw with
Hannaford," replied Matherfield.  "He answers to your description,
anyway.  But I'll tell you how we came across his track.  Last night a
man named Appleyard came to me--he's a chap who has a chemist's shop in
Horseferry Road, Westminster--a middle-aged, quiet sort of man, who
prefaced his remarks by telling us that he very rarely had time to read
newspapers or he'd have been round to see us before.  But yesterday he
happened to pick up a copy of one of last Sunday's papers, and he read
an account of the Hannaford affair.  Then he remembered something that
seemed to him to have a possible connection with it.  Some little time
ago he advertised for an assistant--a qualified assistant.  He'd two or
three applications which weren't exactly satisfactory.  Then, one
evening--he couldn't give any exact date, but from various things he
told us I reckoned up that it must have been on the very evening on
which Hannaford met his death--a man came and made a personal
application.  Appleyard described him--medium-sized, a spare man,
sallow-complexioned, thin face and beard, large dark eyes, very
intelligent, superior manner, poorly dressed, and evidently in low
water----"

"That's the man, I'll be bound!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Did he give
this chemist his name?"

"He did---name and address," answered Matherfield.  "He said his name
was James Granett, and his address Number 8, Fligwood's Rents, Gray's
Inn Road--Holborn end.  He told Appleyard that he was a qualified
chemist, and produced his proofs and some references.  He also said
that though he'd never had a business of his own he'd been employed,
as, indeed, the references showed, by some good provincial firms at one
time or another.  Lately he'd been in the employ of a firm of
manufacturing chemists in East Ham--for some reason or other their
trade had fallen off, and they'd had to reduce their staff, and he'd
been thrown out of work, and had had the further bad luck to be
seriously ill.  This, he said, had exhausted his small means, and he
was very anxious to get another job--so anxious that he appeared to
come to Appleyard on very low terms.  Appleyard told him he'd inquire
into the references and write to him in a day or two.  He did inquire,
found the references quite satisfactory, and wrote to Granett engaging
him.  But Granett never turned up, and Appleyard heard no more of him
until he read this Sunday paper.  Then he felt sure Granett was the
man, and came to me."

"I shouldn't think there's any doubt in the case," remarked Hetherwick.
"But before we go any further, a question.  Did Appleyard say what time
it was when this man came to him that evening?"

"He did.  It was just as he was closing his shop--nine o'clock.
Granett stopped talking with him about half an hour.  Indeed, Appleyard
told me more.  After they'd finished their talk, Appleyard, who doesn't
live at the shop, locked it up, and he then invited Granett to step
across the street with him and have a drink before going home.  They
had a drink together in a neighbouring saloon bar, and chatted a bit
there; it would be nearly ten o'clock, according to Appleyard, when
Granett left him.  And he remembered that Granett, on leaving him, went
round the corner into Victoria Street, on his way, no doubt, to the
Underground."

"And in Victoria Street, equally without doubt, he met Hannaford,"
muttered Hetherwick.  "Well, and the rest of it?"

"Well, of course, as soon as I learnt all this, I determined to go
myself to Fligwood's Rents," replied Matherfield.  "I went, first thing
this morning.  Fligwood's Rents is a slum street--only a man who is
very low down in the world would ever dream of renting a room there.
It's a sort of alley or court on the right-hand side of Gray's Inn
Road, going up--some half-dozen squalid houses on each side, let off in
tenements.  Number 8 was a particularly squalid house!--slatternly
women and squalling brats about the door and general dirt and
shabbiness all round.  None of the women about the place knew the name
of Granett, but after I'd described the man I wanted they argued that
it must be the gentleman on the top back; they added the further
information that they hadn't seen him for some days.  I went up a
filthy stair to the room they indicated; the door was locked and I
couldn't get any response to my repeated knockings.  So then I set out
to discover the landlord, and eventually unearthed a beery individual
in a neighbouring low-class tavern.  I got out of him that he had a
lodger named Granett, who paid him six shillings a week for this top
back room, and he suddenly remembered that Granett hadn't paid his last
week's rent.  That made more impression on him than anything I said,
and he went with me to the house.  And to cut things short, we forced
the door, and found the man dead in his bed!"

"Dead!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Dead--then?"

"Dead then--yes, and he'd been dead several days, according to the
doctors," replied Matherfield grimly.  "Dead enough!  It was a poor
room, but clean--you could see from various little things that the man
had been used to a better condition.  But as regards himself--he'd
evidently gone to bed in the usual way.  His clothes were all carefully
folded and arranged, and by the side of the bed there was a chair on
which was a half-burnt candle and an evening newspaper."

"That would fix the date," suggested Hetherwick.

"Of course, it did--and it was the same date as that on which Hannaford
died," answered Matherfield.  "I've made a careful note of that
circumstance!  Everything looked as if the man had gone to bed in just
his ordinary way, read the paper a bit, blown out his light, dropped
off to sleep, and died in his sleep."

"Yes!--and from what cause, I wonder?" exclaimed Hetherwick.

"Precisely the same idea occurred to me, knowing what I did about
Hannaford," said Matherfield.  "However, the doctors will tell us more
about that.  But to wind up--I had a man of mine with me, and I left
him in charge while I got further help, and sent for Appleyard.
Appleyard identified the dead man at once as the man who had been to
see him.  Indeed, on opening the door, we found Appleyard's letter,
engaging him, lying with one or two others, just inside.  So that's
about all, except that I now want to know if you can positively
identify him as the man you saw with Hannaford, and that I also want to
open a locked box that we found in the room, which may contain
something that will give us further information.  Altogether, it's a
step forward."

"Yes," admitted Hetherwick.  "It's something.  But there's spade-work
to be done yet, Matherfield.  I don't think there's any doubt, now,
that Granett encountered Hannaford after he left Appleyard--and that
indicates that Granett and Hannaford were old acquaintances.  But,
supposing they met at, or soon after, ten o'clock--where did they go,
where did they spend their time between that and the time they entered
my compartment at St. James's Park?"

"That would be--what?" asked Matherfield.

"It was well after midnight--mine was the last train going east,
anyway," said Hetherwick.  "I only just caught it at Sloane Square.
But we can ascertain the exact time, to a minute.  Still, those two,
meeting accidentally, as I conclude they did, must have been together
two or three hours.  Where?--at that time of night.  Surely there must
be some way of finding that out!  Two men, each rather
noticeable--somebody must have seen them together, somewhere!  It seems
impossible that they shouldn't have been seen."

"Aye, but in my experience, Mr. Hetherwick, it's the impossible that
happens!" rejoined Matherfield.  "In a bee-hive like this, where every
man's intent on his own business, ninety-nine men out of a hundred
never observe anything unless it's shoved right under their very eyes.
Of course, if we could find out if and where Hannaford and Granett were
together that night, and where Granett went to after he slipped away at
Charing Cross, it would vastly simplify matters.  But how are we going
to find out?  There's been immense publicity given to this case in the
papers, you know, Mr. Hetherwick--portraits of Hannaford, and details
about the whole affair, and so on, and yet we've had surprisingly
little help and less information.  I'll tell you what it is, sir--what
we want is that tall, muffled-up chap who met Hannaford at Victoria!
Who is he, now?"

"Who, indeed!" assented Hetherwick.  "Vanished!--without a trace."

"Oh, well!" said Matherfield cheerfully, "you never know when you might
light on a trace.  But here we are at this unsavoury Fligwood's Rents."

The cab pulled up at the entrance to a dark, high-walled, stone-paved
alley, which at that moment appeared to be full of women and children;
so, too, did the windows on either side.  The whole place was sombre
and evil-smelling, and Hetherwick felt a sense of pity for the
unfortunate man whose luck had been bad enough to bring him there.

"A murder, a suicide, or a sudden death is as a breath of heaven to
these folk!" said Matherfield as they made their way through the ragged
and frowsy gathering.  "It's an event in uneventful lives.  Here's the
place," he added, as they came to a doorway whereat a policeman stood
on guard.  "And here are the stairs--mind you don't slip on 'em, for
the wood's broken and the banisters are smashed."

Hetherwick cautiously followed his guide to the top of the house.
There at another door stood a second policeman, engaged when they
caught sight of him in looking out through the dirt-obscured window of
the landing.  His bored countenance brightened when he saw Matherfield;
stepping back he quietly opened the door at his side.  And the two
new-comers, silent in view of the task before them, tiptoed into the
room beyond.

It was, as Matherfield had remarked, a poor place, but it was clean and
orderly, and its occupant had evidently tried to make it as habitable
and comfortable as his means would allow.  There were one or two good
prints on the table; half a dozen books on an old chest of drawers; in
a cracked vase on the mantelpiece there were a few flowers, wilted and
dead.  Hetherwick took in all this at a glance; then he turned to
Matherfield, who silently drew aside a sheet from the head and
shoulders of the rigid figure on the bed, and looked inquiringly at his
companion.  And Hetherwick gave the dead man's face one careful
inspection and nodded.

"Yes!" he said.  "That's the man!"

"Without doubt?" asked Matherfield.

"No doubt at all," affirmed Hetherwick.  "That is the man who was with
Hannaford in the train.  I knew him instantly."

Matherfield replaced the sheet and turned to a small table which stood
in the window.  On it was a box, a square, old-fashioned thing, clamped
at the corners.

"This seems to be the only thing he had that's what you may call
private," he observed.  "It's locked, but I've got a tool here that'll
open it.  I want to know what's in it--there may be something that'll
give us a clue."

Hetherwick stood by while Matherfield forced open the lock with an
instrument which he produced from his pocket, and began to examine the
contents of the box.  At first there seemed little that was likely to
yield information.  There was a complete suit of clothes and an outfit
of decent linen; it seemed as if Granett had carefully kept these in
view of better days.  There were more books, all of a technical nature,
relating to chemistry; there was a small case containing chemical
apparatus, and another in which lay a pair of scales; in a third they
found a microscope.

"He wasn't down to the very end of his resources, or he'd have pawned
these things," muttered Matherfield.  "They all look good stuff,
especially the microscope.  But here's more what I want--letters!"

He drew forth two bundles of letters, neatly arranged and tied up with
tape.  Unloosing the fastenings and rapidly spreading the envelopes out
on the table, he suddenly put his finger on an address.

"There you are, Mr. Hetherwick," he exclaimed.  "That's just what I
expected to find out--though I certainly didn't think we should
discover it so quickly This man has lived at Sellithwaite some time or
other.  Look there, at this address--_Mr. James Granett, 7, Victoria
Terrace, Sellithwaite, Yorkshire_.  Of course!--that's how he came to
know and be with Hannaford.  They were old acquaintances.  See, there
are several letters."

Hetherwick took two or three of the envelopes in his hand and looked
closely at them.  He perceived at once what Matherfield had not noticed.

"Just so!" he said.  "But what's of far more importance is the date.
Look at this--you see?  That shows that Granett was living at
Sellithwaite ten years ago--it was of that time that Hannaford was
talking to him in the train."

"Oh, we're getting at something!" assented Matherfield.  "Now we'll put
everything back, and I'll take this box away and examine it thoroughly
at leisure."  He replaced the various articles, twisted a cord round
the box, knotted it, and turned to the dead man's clothes, lying neatly
folded on a chair close by.  "I haven't had a look at the pockets of
those things yet," he continued.  "I'll just take a glance--you never
know."

Hetherwick again watched in silence.  There was little of interest
revealed until Matherfield suddenly drew a folded bit of paper from one
of the waistcoat pockets.  Smoothing it out he uttered a sharp
exclamation.

"Good!" he said.  "See this?  A brand new five pound note!  Now, I'll
lay anything he hadn't had that on him long!  Got it that night,
doubtless.  And--from whom?"

"I should say Hannaford gave it to him," suggested Hetherwick.

But Matherfield shook his head and put the note in his own pocket.

"That's a definite clue!" he said, with emphasis.  "I can trace that!"




CHAPTER IX

THE MEDICINE BOTTLE

Hetherwick went away from the sordid atmosphere of Fligwood's Rents
wondering more than ever at this new development; he continued to
wonder and to speculate all the rest of that day and most of the next.
That Granett's sudden death had followed on Hannaford's seemed to him a
sure proof that there was more behind this mystery than anybody had so
far conceived of.  Personally, he had not the slightest doubt that
whoever poisoned Hannaford had also poisoned Granett.  And he was not
at all surprised when, late in the afternoon of the day following upon
that of the visit to Dorking, Matherfield walked into his chambers with
a face full of news.

"I know what you're going to tell me, Matherfield," said Hetherwick,
motioning his visitor to an easy chair.  "The doctors have held a
post-mortem on Granett, and they find that he was poisoned."

Matherfield's face fell; he was robbed of his chance of a dramatic
announcement.

"Well, and that's just what I was going to tell you," he answered.
"That's what they do say.  Same doctors that performed the autopsy on
Hannaford.  Doesn't surprise you?"

"Not in the least," replied Hetherwick.  "I expected it.  They're sure
of it?"

"Dead certain!  But, as in Hannaford's case, they're not certain of the
particular poison used.  However--also as in his case--they've
submitted the whole case to two big swells in that line, one of 'em the
man that's always employed by the Home Office in these affairs, and the
other that famous specialist at St. Martha's Hospital--I forget his
name.  They'll get to work; they're at work on the Hannaford case now.
Difficult job, I understand--some very subtle poison, probably little
known.  However, I believe we've got a clue about it."

"A clue--about the poison?" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "What clue?"

"Well, this," answered Matherfield.  "After you'd gone away from
Fligwood's Rents yesterday afternoon, and while I was making
arrangements for the removal of the poor chap's body, I took another
careful look round the room.  Now, if you noticed things as closely as
all that, you may have observed that Granett's bed was partly in a sort
of alcove--the head part.  In the corner of that alcove, or recess,
just where he could have set them down by reaching his arm out of bed,
I found a bottle and a glass tumbler.  The bottle was an ordinary
medicine bottle--not a very big one.  It had the cork in it and about
an inch of fluid, which, on taking out the cork, I found to be whisky,
and, I should say by the smell, whisky of very good quality.  But I
noticed that there was the very slightest trace of some sort of
sediment at the bottom.  There was a trace of similar sediment in the
bottom of the tumbler.  Now, of course, I put these things up most
carefully, sealed them, and handed them over to the doctors.  For it
was very evident to me--reconstructing things, you know--that Granett
had mixed himself a drink, a nightcap, if you like to call it so, from
that bottle on getting into bed, and then had put bottle and glass down
by his bed-head, in the corner.  And just as I mean to trace that
five-pound note, Mr. Hetherwick, so I mean to trace that bottle!"

"How?" asked Hetherwick, closely interested.  "And to what, or whom?"

"To the chemists where it came from," answered Matherfield.  "It came
from some chemist's, and I'll find which!"

"There are hundreds of chemists in London," said Hetherwick.  "It's a
stiff proposition."

"It's going to be done, anyway," asserted Matherfield.  "And it mayn't
be such a stiff job as it at first looks to be.  See here!  There were
labels on that bottle, both of 'em torn and defaced, it's true, but
still with enough on them to narrow down the field of inquiry.  I've
had the face of the bottle photographed--here's a print of the result."

He brought out a photographic print, roughly finished and mounted on a
card, and handed it over to Hetherwick, who took it to the light and
examined it carefully.  It showed the front of the medicine bottle,
with a label at the top and another at the bottom.  Each had been torn,
as if to obliterate names and addresses, but a good deal of the
lettering was left.



    +-----------------------------+
    |    C. A     , Esq.,         |
    |    The mix  re as before    |
    |    No. A.1152               |
    +-----------------------------+

    +-----------------------------+
    |  _Note_.--This medicine has |
    |  been dispensed by a fully  |
    |  qualified Chemist with the |
    |          to possible drugs  |
    |              is guaranteed  |
    |                  wishes of  |
    |                  the Pres-  |
    |                             |
    |                  M.P.S.     |
    |                    St. W.C. |
    +-----------------------------+


"That bottom label's the thing, Mr. Hetherwick," remarked Matherfield.
"Let me get that hiatus filled up with the name and address of the
chemist, and I'll soon find out who C. A. blank, Esquire, is!  The
chemist is one in the West Central district; he's a member of the
Pharmaceutical Society; he'll have somebody whose initials are C. A. on
his books; he'll recognise the number A.1152 of the prescription.  It's
a decided clue; and even if there are, as there undoubtedly are, scores
of chemists in the West Central district, I'll run this one down!"

Hetherwick handed back the photograph and began to pace up and down the
room.  Suddenly he turned on his visitor, his mind made up to tell him
what he himself had been doing.

"Matherfield," he said, dropping into his chair again and adopting a
tone of confidence, "what do you make of this?  I mean--what's your
theory?  Is it your opinion that the deaths of these two men are--so to
speak--all of a piece?"

"That is my opinion!" answered Matherfield with an emphatic nod.  "I've
no more doubt about it than I have that I see you, Mr. Hetherwick.  All
of a piece, to be sure!  Whoever poisoned Hannaford poisoned Granett!
I'll tell you how I've figured it out since the doctors told me, only a
couple of hours since, what their opinion is about Granett.  This way:
Hannaford and Granett knew each other at Sellithwaite ten years ago.
That night when Granett left Appleyard in Horseferry Road and turned
into Victoria Street, he met Hannaford--accidentally."

"Why accidentally?" asked Hetherwick.

"Well, that's what I think," said Matherfield.  "I've figured in that
way.  Of course, it may have been by appointment.  But anyway, they
met--we know that.  Now then, where did they spend their time between
then and the time they got into your carriage at St. James's Park?  We
don't know.  But here comes in an unknown factor--what about the
strange man at Victoria, the man muffled to his eyes?  Two things
suggest themselves to me, Mr. Hetherwick.  Did Hannaford take Granett
to see that man, or did Hannaford and Granett meet at that man's?  For
I think that man, whoever he is, is at the bottom of every thing."

"Why should they meet at that man's?" asked Hetherwick.



"Well," answered Matherfield, "I think that secret of Hannaford's has
something to do with it.  He had the sealed packet on him when he left
Malter's Hotel; it had disappeared when we searched his clothing after
his death.  Now, the granddaughter says it had to do with chemicals.
Suppose the tall, muffled man was a chap whose business opinion on this
secret Hannaford wanted, and that they met at Victoria and went to the
man's rooms somewhere in that district?  Suppose Granett--another man
in the chemistry line--came there, knowing both?  Supposing the muffled
man poisoned both of 'em, to keep the secret to himself?  Do you see
what I'm after?  Very well!  There you are.  The thing is to hunt out
that man, whoever he is.  I wish I knew what Hannaford's secret was,
though--its precise nature."

"Matherfield," said Hetherwick, "I'll tell you!  You've been very
confidential with me; I'll be equally so with you, on condition that we
work together from this.  The fact is, I've been at work.  I'm
immensely interested in this case.  Ever since I saw Hannaford die in
that train and in that awfully mysterious fashion it's fascinated me,
and I'm going to the very end of it.  Now I'll tell you all I've been
doing, and what I've discovered.  Listen carefully."

He went on to tell his visitor the whole details of his visit to
Sellithwaite, of the results of his investigations there, and of
Rhona's doings and observations at Riversreade Court.  Matherfield
listened in absorbed silence.

"Is Miss Hannaford going to this secretaryship, then?" he demanded
abruptly, at the end of Hetherwick's story.  "Is it settled?"

"Practically, yes," replied Hetherwick.  "I heard from Lady Riversreade
this morning; so did Mr. Kenthwaite.  We gave Miss Hannaford--to be
known to Lady Riversreade as Miss Featherstone--very good
recommendations for the post, and I expect that as soon as she's had
our letters, Lady Riversreade will telephone to Miss Hannaford that
she's to go at once.  Then--she'll go."

"To act as--spy?" suggested Matherfield.

"If you put it that way, yes," assented Hetherwick.  "Though, from what
she saw of her yesterday, Miss Hannaford formed a very favourable
opinion of Lady Riversreade.  However, I'm so certain that somehow or
other, perhaps innocently, she's connected with this affair, that we
mustn't lose any chance."

"And Miss Hannaford will report anything likely to you?" asked
Matherfield.

"Just so!  Miss Hannaford's duties don't include any Sunday work; on
Sunday she'll come to town, and if there's anything to tell, she'll
tell it--to me.  She's a smart, clever girl, Matherfield, and she'll
keep her eyes open."

Matherfield nodded, and for a while sat silent, evidently lost in his
own thoughts.

"Oh, she's a clever girl, right enough!" he said suddenly.  "Um!  I
wonder who this Lady Riversreade really is, now?"

"This Lady Riversreade!" laughed Hetherwick.  "A multi-millionairess!"

"Aye, just so; but who was she before her marriage?  If she is the
woman who was known as Mrs. Whittingham----"

"Can there be any doubt about it after what I found out?"

"You never know, Mr. Hetherwick!  Lord bless you! they talk about the
long arm of coincidence.  Why, in my time I've known of things that
make me feel there's nothing wonderful about the most amazing
coincidence!  But--if Lady Riversreade used to be Mrs. Whittingham,
then I'd like to know all about Mrs. Whittingham until she became Lady
Riversreade, and who she was before she was Mrs. Whittingham, if she
ever was Mrs. Whittingham!"

"Stiff job, Matherfield," said Hetherwick.  "I think we shall have
enough to do to keep an eye on Lady Riversreade."

"You anticipate something there?" suggested Matherfield.

"I think something may transpire," replied Hetherwick.

Matherfield got to his feet.

"Well," he said, "keep me informed, and I'll keep you informed.  We've
something to go on--Lord knows what we shall make out of it!"

"You're doing your best to trace the tall man?" asked Hetherwick.

"Best!" exclaimed Matherfield with an air of disgust.  "We've done our
best and our better than best!  I've had special men all round that
Victoria district; I should think every tall man in that part's been
eyed over.  And I believe that Mr. Ledbitter has so got the thing on
his brain that he's been spending all his spare time patrolling the
neighbourhood and going in and out of restaurants and saloons looking
for the man he saw--of course, without result!"

"All the same," said Hetherwick, "that man is--somewhere!"

Matherfield went away, and except at the inquest on Granett--whereat
nothing transpired which was not already known--Hetherwick did not see
him again for several days.  He himself progressed no further in his
investigations during that time.  Rhona Hannaford betook herself to
Riversreade Court, as secretary to its mistress's Home, and until the
Sunday succeeding his departure Hetherwick heard nothing of her.  Then
she came up to town on the Sunday morning and, in accordance with their
previous arrangement, Hetherwick met her at Victoria, and took her to
lunch at a neighbouring hotel.

"Anything to tell?" he asked, when they had settled down to their soup.
"Any happenings?"

"Nothing!" answered Rhona.  "Everything exceedingly proper,
business-like, and orderly.  And Lady Riversreade appears to me to be a
model sort of person--her devotion to that Home and its inmates is
remarkable!  I don't believe anything's going to happen, or that I
shall ever have anything to report."

"Well, that'll have its compensations," said Hetherwick.  "Leave us all
the more time for ourselves, won't it?"

He gave her a look to which Rhona responded, shyly but unmistakably;
she knew, as well as he did, that they were getting fond of each
other's society.  And they continued to meet on Sundays, and three or
four went by, and still she had nothing to tell that related to the
mystery of Hannaford and Granett.

Three weeks elapsed before Matherfield had anything to tell, either.
Then he walked into Hetherwick's chambers one morning with news in his
face.

"Traced it!" he said.  "Knew I should!  That five-pound note--brand
new.  Only a question of time to do that, of course."

"Well?" inquired Hetherwick.

"It was one of twenty fivers paid by the cashier of the London and
Country Bank in Piccadilly to the secretary of Vivian's," continued
Matherfield.  "Date--day before Hannaford's death.  Vivian's, let me
tell you, is a swell night club.  Now then, how did that note get into
the hands of Granett?  That's going to be a stiff 'un!"

"So stiff that I'm afraid you mustn't ask me to go in at it," agreed
Hetherwick good-humouredly.  "I must stick to my own line--when the
chance comes."

The chance came on the following Sunday, when, in pursuance of now
established custom, he met Rhona.  She gave him a significant look as
soon as she got out of the train.

"News--at last!" she said, as they turned up the platform.
"Something's happened--but what it means I don't know."




CHAPTER X

THE MYSTERIOUS VISITOR

The head-waiter in the restaurant to which Hetherwick and Rhona
repaired every Sunday immediately upon her arrival now knew these two
well by sight, and forming his own conclusions about them, always
reserved for them a table in a quiet and secluded corner.  Hither they
now proceeded, and had scarcely taken their accustomed seats before
Rhona plunged into her story.

"I expect you want to know what it's all about, so I won't keep you
waiting," she said.  "It was on Friday--Friday morning--that it
happened, and I half thought of writing to you about it that evening.
Then I thought it best to tell you personally to-day--besides, I should
have had to write an awfully long letter.  There are things to explain;
I'd better explain them first.  Our arrangements down there at
Riversreade, for instance.  They're like this: Lady Riversreade and I
always breakfast together at the Court, about nine o'clock.  At ten we
go across the grounds to the Home.  There we have a sort of formal
office--two rooms, one of which, the first opening from the hall, I
have, the other, opening out of it, is Lady Riversreade's private
sanctum.  In the hall itself we have an ex-army man, Mitchell, as
hall-porter, to attend to the door and so on.  All the morning we are
busy with letters, accounts, reports of the staff, and that sort of
thing.  We have lunch at the Home, and we're generally busy until four
or five o'clock.  Got all that?"

"Every scrap!" replied Hetherwick.  "Perfectly plain."

"Very well," continued Rhona.  "One more detail, however.  A good many
people, chiefly medical men and folk interested in homes and hospitals,
call, wanting to look over and to know about the place--which, I may
tell you in parenthesis, costs Lady Riversreade a pretty tidy penny!
Mitchell's instructions as regards all callers are to bring their cards
to me--I interview them first; if I can deal with them, I do; if I
think it necessary or desirable, I take them in to Lady Riversreade.
We have to sort them out--some, I am sure, come out of mere idle
curiosity; in fact, the only visitors we want to see there are either
medical men who have a genuine interest in the place and can do
something for it, or people who are connected with its particular
inmates.  Well, on Friday morning last, about a quarter to twelve, as I
was busy with my letters, I heard a car come up the drive, and
presently Mitchell came into my room with a card bearing the name _Dr.
Cyprian Baseverie_.  Instead of being an engraved card as, by all the
recognised standards, it should have been, it was a printed card--that
was the first thing I noticed."

"Your powers of observation," remarked Hetherwick admiringly, "are
excellent, and should prove most useful."

"Thank you for the compliment!--but that didn't need much observation,"
retorted Rhona with a laugh.  "It was obvious.  However, I asked
Mitchell what Dr. Baseverie wanted; Mitchell replied that the gentleman
desired an interview with Lady Riversreade.  Now, as I said before, we
never refuse doctors, so I told Mitchell to bring Dr. Baseverie to me.
A moment later Dr. Baseverie entered.  I want to describe him
particularly, and you must listen most attentively.  Figure, then, to
yourself a man of medium height, neither stout nor slender, but
comfortably plump, and apparently about forty-five years of age,
dressed very correctly and fashionably in a black morning coat and
vest, dark striped trousers, immaculate as to linen and neckwear, and
furnished with a new silk hat, pearl-grey gloves and a tightly rolled
gold-mounted umbrella.  Incidentally, he wore a thin gold watch-chain,
white spats and highly polished shoes.  Got that?"

"I see him--his clothes and things, I mean," assented Hetherwick.
"Fashionable medico sort, evidently!  But--himself?"

"Now his face," continued Rhona.  "Imagine a man with an almost
absolutely bloodless countenance--a face the colour of old
ivory--lighted by a pair of peculiarly piercing eyes, black as sloes,
and the pallor of the face heightened by a rather heavy black moustache
and equally black, slightly crinkled hair, thick enough above the ears
but becoming sparse and thin on the crown.  Imagine, too, a pair of
full, red lips above a round but determined chin and a decidedly hooked
nose, and you have--the man I'm describing!"

"Um!" said Hetherwick reflectingly.  "Hebraic, I think, from your
description."

"That's just what I thought myself," agreed Rhona.  "I said to myself
at once, 'Whatever and whoever else you are, my friend, you're a Jew!'
But the creature's manner and speech were English enough--very English.
He had all the well-accustomed air of the medical practitioner who is
also a bit of a man of the world, and I saw at once that anybody who
tried to fence with him would usually come off second-best.  His
explanation of his presence was reasonable and commonplace enough: he
was deeply interested in the sort of cases we had in the Home, and
desired to acquaint himself with our methods and arrangements and so
on.  He made use of a few technical terms and phrases which were quite
beyond my humble powers, and I carried in his card to Lady Riversreade.
Lady Riversreade is always accessible when there's a doctor in the
case, and in two minutes Dr. Baseverie was closeted with her."

"That ends the first chapter, I suppose?" said Hetherwick.
"Interesting--very!  A good curtain!  And the next?"

"The events of the second chapter," replied Rhona, "took place in Lady
Riversreade's room, and I cannot even guess at their nature.  I can
only tell of things that I know.  But there's a good deal in that.  To
begin with, although Dr. Baseverie had said to me that he desired to
see the Home--which, of course, in the ordinary way meant his being
either taken round by Lady Riversreade or by our resident house
physician--he was not taken round.  He never left that room from the
moment he entered it until the moment in which he left it.  And he
remained in it an entire hour!"

"With Lady Riversreade?"

"With Lady Riversreade!  She never left it, either.  Nor did I go into
it; she hates me to go in if she has anybody with her at any time.
No!--there those two were together, from ten minutes to twelve until
five minutes to one.  Yet the man had said that he wanted to look
round!"

"Is there any other way by which they could have left that room?"
suggested Hetherwick.  "Another door--or a French window?"

"There is nothing of the sort.  The door into my room is the only means
of entrance or exit to or from Lady Riversreade's.  No--they were there
all the time."

"Did you hear anything?"

"Nothing!  The house in which Lady Riversreade set up this Home is an
old, solid, well-built one--none of your modern gimcrack work in
it!--it's a far better house than the Court, grand as that may be.  All
the doors and windows fit--I never heard a sound from the room."

"Well," asked Hetherwick, after due meditation, "and at the end of the
hour?"

"At the end of the hour the door suddenly opened and Dr. Baseverie
appeared, hat, gloves and umbrella in hand.  He half turned as he came
out and said a few words to Lady Riversreade.  I heard them.  He said,
'Well, then, next Friday morning at the same time?'  Then he nodded,
stepped into my room, closed the door behind him, made me a very
polite, smiling bow as he passed my desk, and went out.  A moment later
he drove off in the car--it had been waiting at the entrance all that
time."

"I suppose that's the end of chapter two," suggested Hetherwick.  "Is
there more?"

"Some," responded Rhona.  "During the hour which Dr. Baseverie had
spent with Lady Riversreade I had been very busy typing letters.  When
he had gone I took them into her room, so that she could sign them.  I
suppose I was a bit curious about what had just happened and may have
been more than usually observant--anyway, I felt certain that the visit
of this man, whoever he is, had considerably upset Lady Riversreade.
She looked it."

"Precisely how?" inquired Hetherwick.

"Well, I couldn't exactly tell you.  Perhaps a man wouldn't have
noticed it.  But being a woman, I did.  She was perturbed--she'd been
annoyed, or distressed, or surprised, or--something.  I saw signs
which, as a woman, were unmistakable--to a woman.  The man's visit had
been distasteful--troubling.  I'm as certain of that as I am that this
is roast mutton."

"Did she say anything?"

"Not one word.  She was unusually taciturn--silent, in fact.  She took
the letters in silence, signed them in silence.  No, on reflection, she
never spoke a word while I was in the room.  I took the letters away
and began putting them in their envelopes.  Soon afterwards Lady
Riversreade came through my room and went out, and I saw her go across
the grounds to the Court.  She didn't turn up at the usual luncheon at
the Home, and I didn't see her again that afternoon.  In fact, I didn't
see her again that day, for when I went home to the Court at five
o'clock, Lady Riversreade's maid told me that her mistress had gone up
to town and wouldn't be home until late that night.  I went to bed
before she returned."

"Next morning?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Next morning she was just as usual, and things went on in the usual
way."

"Did she ever mention this man and his visit to you?" asked Hetherwick.

"No--not a word of him.  But I found out something about him myself on
Friday afternoon."

"What?  Something relevant?"

"May be relevant to--something.  I was wondering about him--and his
printed card.  I thought it odd that a medical man, so smartly dressed
and all that, should present a card like that--not one well printed, a
cheap thing!  Besides, it had no address.  I wondered--mere
inquisitiveness, perhaps--where the creature came from.  Now, we've a
jolly good lot of the usual reference-books there at the Home--and
there's a first-class right up-to-date medical directory amongst them.
So I looked up the name of Dr. Cyprian Baseverie.  I say, looked it
up--but I didn't do that--for it wasn't there!  He's neither an
English, nor a Scottish, nor an Irish medical man."

"Foreigner, then," said Hetherwick.  "French, perhaps, or--American."

"May be an Egyptian, or a Persian, or a Eurasian, for anything I know,"
remarked Rhona.  "What I know is that he's not on the list in that
directory, though from his speech and manner you'd think he'd been
practising in the West End all his life!  Anyway, that's the story.  Is
there anything in it?"

Hetherwick picked up his glass of claret by its stem and looked
thoughtfully through the contents of the bowl.

"The particular thing is--the extent and quality of Lady Riversreade's
annoyance, or dismay, or perturbation, occasioned by the man's visit,"
he said at last.  "If she was really very much upset----"

"If you want my honest opinion as eye-witness and as woman," remarked
Rhona, "Lady Riversreade was very much upset.  She gave me the
impression that she'd just received very bad, disconcerting, unpleasant
news.  After seeing and watching her as she signed the letters I had no
doubt whatever that the man had deliberately lied to me when he said he
wanted to see the Home and its working--what he really wanted was
access to Lady Riversreade."

"Look here!" exclaimed Hetherwick suddenly "Were you present when this
man went into Lady Riversreade's room?"

"Present?  Of course I was!  I took him in--myself."

"You saw them meet?"

"To be sure!"

"Well, then, you know!  Were they strangers?  Did she recognise him?
Did she show any sign of recognition whatever when she set eyes on him?"

"No, none!  I'm perfectly certain she'd never seen the man before in
her life!  I could see quite well that he was an absolute stranger to
her."

"And she to him?"

"Oh, that I don't know!  He may have seen her a thousand times.  But
I'm sure she'd never seen him."

Hetherwick laid down his knife and fork with a gesture of finality.

"I'm going to find out who that chap is," he answered.  "Got to!"

"You think his visit may have something to do with this?" asked Rhona.

"May, yes.  Anyway, I'm not going to let any chance go.  There's enough
mystery in what you tell me about the man to make it worth while
following him up.  It must be done."

"How will you do it?"

"You say he said that he was going there again next Friday at the same
time?  Well, the thing to do, then, is to watch and follow him when he
goes away."

"I'm afraid I'm no use for that!  He'd know me."

"Nor am I!--I'm too conspicuous," laughed Hetherwick.  "If I were a
head and shoulders shorter, I might be some use.  But I've got the very
man--my clerk, one Mapperley.  He's just the sort to follow and dog
anybody and yet never be seen himself.  As you'll say, when you've the
pleasure of seeing him, Mapperley's the most ordinary, commonplace chap
you ever set eyes on--pass absolutely unnoticed in any Cockney crowd.
But he's as sharp as they make 'em, veiling a peculiar astuteness under
his eminently undistinguished features.  And what I shall do is
this--I'll give Mapperley a full and detailed description of Dr.
Cyprian Baseverie: I've memorised yours already; Mapperley will
memorise mine.  Now Baseverie, whoever he may be, will probably go down
to Dorking by the 10.10 from here; so will Mapperley.  And after
Mapperley has once spotted his man, he'll not lose sight of him."

"And he'll do--what?" asked Rhona.

"Follow him to Dorking--watch him--follow him back to London--find out
where he goes when he returns--run him to earth, in fact.  Then he'll
report to me--and we shall know more than we do now, and also what to
do next."

"I wonder what it's all going to lead to?" said Rhona.  "Pretty much of
a maze, isn't it?"

"It is," agreed Hetherwick.  "But if we can only get a firm hold on a
thread----"

"And that might break!" she laughed.

"Well, then, one that won't break," he said.  "There are several loose
ends lying about already.  Matherfield's got a hold on one or two."

He went to see Matherfield next morning and told him the story that he
had heard from Rhona.  Matherfield grew thoughtful.

"Well, Mr. Hetherwick," he said, after a pause, "it's as I've said
before--if this Lady Riversreade is mixed up in it, the thing to do is
to go back and get as full a history as can possibly be got of her
antecedents.  We'll have to get on to that--but we'll wait to see what
that clerk of yours discovers about this man.  There may be something
in it--in the meantime I'm hard at work on my own clues."

"Any luck?" asked Hetherwick.

"Scarcely that.  But, as I say, we're at work.  The five-pound note is
a difficult matter.  Given in change, of course, at Vivian's Night
Club--but they tell me there that it's no uncommon thing to change ten,
twenty, and even fifty-pound notes for their customers--it's a swell
lot who forgather there--and of course they've no recollection whatever
about that particular note or night.  Still, the fact remains--that
note came through Vivian's, and through one of its frequenters, to
Granett, and I'm in hopes."

"And the medicine bottle?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Ah, there is more chance!" responded Matherfield, with a lightening
eye.  "That's only a question of time!  I've got a man going round all
the chemists in the West Central district--stiff job, for there are
more of 'em than I believed.  But he's bound to hit on the right one
eventually.  And then--well, we shall have a pretty good idea, if not
positive proof, as to how Granett got hold of the stuff that poisoned
him."

"I suppose there's no doubt that there was poison in that bottle?"
inquired Hetherwick.

"According to the specialists, none," replied Matherfield.  "And in the
glass too.  What sort of poison, I don't know--you know what these
experts are--so mysterious about things!  But they have told me
this--the stuff that settled Granett was identical with that which
finished off Hannaford.  That's certain."

"Then it probably came from the same source," said Hetherwick.

"Oh, my notion is that the man or men who poisoned one man poisoned the
other," exclaimed Matherfield.  "And at the same time.  At least, I
think Granett got his dose at the same time--probably carried it off in
his pocket and drank it when he got home.  But--we shall trace that
bottle!  Let me know what you find out about this man Baseverie, Mr.
Hetherwick--every little helps."

Hetherwick duly coached Mapperley in the part he wanted him to play,
and Mapperley, with money in his pockets and a pipe in his mouth,
lounged off to Victoria on the following Friday morning.  His principal
saw nothing and heard nothing of him all that day.




CHAPTER XI

LADY RIVERSREADE

As Hetherwick was breakfasting next morning, Mapperley, outwardly
commonplace and phlegmatic as ever, walked into his room.

"Brief outline first, Mapperley," commanded Hetherwick, instinctively
scenting news.  "Details later.  Well?"

"Spotted him at once at Victoria," said Mapperley.  "Followed him down
there.  He was at Riversreade an hour.  Then went back to Dorking--had
lunch at 'Red Lion.'  He stopped there till four o'clock, lunching and
idling.  Went back to town by the 4.29, arriving 6.5.  I followed him
then to the Caf de Paris.  He dined there and hung about till past
ten.  And then he went to Vivian's Night Club."

Hetherwick pricked up his ears at that.  Vivian's Night Club!--here, at
any rate, seemed to be a link in the chain of which Matherfield
believed himself to hold at least one end.  The five-pound note found
on Granett had been traced to Vivian's Night Club: now Mapperley had
tracked Lady Riversreade's mysterious visitor to the same resort.

"To Vivian's Night Club, eh, Mapperley?" he said.  "Let's see?--where
is that?"

"Entrance is in Candlestick Passage, off St. Martin's Lane," replied
Mapperley with promptitude.  "Club's on first floor--jolly fine suite
of rooms, too!"

"You've been in it?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Twice!  Not last night, though.  You didn't give me any further orders
than to see where he went finally, after returning to town.  So, when
I'd run him to earth at Vivian's, I went home.  I argued that if he was
wanted further, Vivian's would find him."

"All right, Mapperley.  But before that?  You followed him to
Riversreade Court?"

Mapperley grinned widely.

"No!--I did better than that.  I was there before him--much better
that, than following.  I spotted him quick enough at Victoria, and made
sure he got into the 10.10.  Then I got in.  As soon as we got to
Dorking, I jumped out, got outside the station and chartered a taxi and
drove off to Riversreade Court.  I made the driver hide his cab up the
road: I laid low in the plantation opposite the entrance gates.
Presently my lord came along and drove up to the house.  He was there
the best part of an hour; then he drove off again towards Dorking.  I
followed at a good distance: kept him in sight, all the same.  He got
out of his conveyance in the High Street: so did I.  He went into the
Red Lion: so did I.  He had lunch there: so had I.  After that he
lounged about in the smoking-room: I kept an eye on him."

"I suppose he didn't meet anybody?"

"Nobody!"

"Well, and at the Caf de Paris?  Did he meet anybody there?"

"He exchanged a nod and a word here and there with men--and women--that
came in and went out.  But as to any arranged meeting, I should say
not.  I should say, too, that he was well known at the Caf de Paris."

"Did he seem to be a man of means?  You know what I mean?"

"He did himself very well at lunch and dinner, anyway," said Mapperley,
with another grin.  "Bottle of claret at Dorking, and a pint of
champagne at the Caf de Paris--big cigars, too.  That sort of man, you
know."

Hetherwick considered matters a moment.

"How do you get in to this Vivian's Night Club?" he asked suddenly.

"Pay!" answered Mapperley laconically.  "At the door.  Some nonsense
about being proposed, but that's all bosh!  Two of you go--say Brown
and Smith.  Brown proposes Smith and Smith proposes Brown.  All rot!
Anybody can get in--with money."

"And what goes on there?"

"Dancing!  Drinking!  Devilry!  Quite respectable, though," replied
Mapperley.  "Been no prosecutions, anyway--so far."

"What time does it open?"

"Nine o'clock," answered Mapperley, with a suggestive grin.  "In the
old days it didn't open till after the theatres.  But now--earlier."

"Really not a night-club at all--in the old acceptation of the term,"
suggested Hetherwick.  "Evening, really?"

"That's about it," agreed Mapperley.  "Anyhow, it's Vivian's."

For the second time in the course of his investigations, Hetherwick's
thoughts turned to Boxley.  Boxley's love of intimate acquaintance with
all sides of London life had doubtless led him to look in at Vivian's:
he would ask Boxley for some further information.  And he looked up
Boxley at the club.

Boxley knew Vivian's well enough--innocent and innocuous now, said
Boxley, what with all these new regulations and so on: degenerated,
indeed--or improved, just whichever way you regarded it--into a supper
club and that sort of thing.  Dancing?--oh yes, there was dancing, and
so on--but things had altered--altered.

"Well, I don't want to dance there, nor to go there at all, for that
matter, unless I'm obliged to," said Hetherwick.  "What I want to know
is something about a man who, I believe, frequents the place--a
somewhat notable man."

"Describe him!" commanded Boxley.

Hetherwick retailed Rhona's description of Baseverie: Boxley nodded.

"I know that man--by sight," he said.  "Seen him there.  I believe he's
something to do with the proprietorship: that place is owned by a small
syndicate.  But I don't know his name.  I've seen him outside
too--round about Leicester Square and its purlieus."

Hetherwick went from Boxley to Matherfield and told him the result of
Mapperley's work.

"I know Vivian's, of course," said Matherfield.  "Been in there two or
three times lately in relation to this five-pound note.  Don't remember
seeing this man, though.  But in view of what your clerk says, I'd like
to see him.  Come with me.  We'll go to-night."

"Make it Monday," suggested Hetherwick.  "To-morrow, Sunday, I shall be
meeting Miss Hannaford again, and before we go to Vivian's I'd like to
know if she has anything to tell about the last visit of Baseverie to
Riversreade Court--the visit that Mapperley watched yesterday.  She may
have."

"Monday night then," agreed Matherfield.  "I don't know what we can
expect, but I'd certainly like to know who this man is and why he goes
to Lady Riversreade."

"No good, you may be sure!" said Hetherwick.  "But we'll ferret it
out--somehow."

"Odd, that things seem to be centring round Vivian's!" mused
Matherfield.  "The fiver--and now this.  Well--Monday evening
then?--perhaps Miss Hannaford can supply a bit of extra news to-morrow."

Hetherwick, meeting Rhona at Victoria next day, found his arm grasped
in Rhona's right hand and himself twisted round.

"If you want to see Lady Riversreade in the flesh, there she is!"
whispered Rhona.  "Came up by the same train--there, going towards the
bookstall; a tall man with her!"

At that moment Lady Riversreade turned to speak to a porter who was
carrying some light luggage for her, and Hetherwick had a full and good
view of her face and figure.  A fine, handsome, capable-looking woman,
he said to himself, and one that once seen would not easily be
forgotten.

"Who's the man?" he asked, looking from Lady Riversreade to her
companion, a tall, bronzed man of military appearance, and apparently
of about her own age.

"Major Penteney," replied Rhona promptly.  "He's a friend of hers, who
takes a tremendous interest in the Home--in fact, he acts as a sort of
representative of it here in town.  He's often down at the Court--I
believe he's in love with her."

"Well-matched couple," observed Hetherwick, as the two people under
notice moved away towards the exit.  "And what's Lady Riversreade come
up for?"

"Oh, I don't know that," replied Rhona.  "She never tells me anything
about her private doings.  I heard her say that she was going to Town
this morning and shouldn't be back until Tuesday, but that's all I
know."

"That man, Baseverie, came again on Friday?" suggested Hetherwick.
"But I know he did--Mapperley watched him.  Anything happen?"

"Nothing--except that Lady Riversreade told me that if Dr. Baseverie
called he was to be brought in to her at once," answered Rhona.  "He
came at the same time as before, and was with her an hour."

"Any signs on her part of being further upset?" asked Hetherwick.

"No--on the contrary she seemed quite cool and collected after he'd
gone," said Rhona.  "Of course she made no reference to his visit."

"Has she never mentioned him to you?"

"Never!  In spite of the fact that his professed object was to see the
Home and the patients, he's seen neither."

"Which shows that that was all a mere excuse to get speech with her!"
muttered Hetherwick.  "Well--we're going to find out who this Dr.
Baseverie is!  Matherfield and I intend to get in touch with him
to-morrow night."

But when the next night came Hetherwick's plans about the visit to
Vivian's were frustrated by an unexpected happening, and neither he nor
Matherfield as much as crossed the threshold of the night-club in
Candlestick Passage.  They went there at ten o'clock: that, said
Matherfield, was a likely hour--between then and eleven-thirty the
place would be full of its habitual frequenters: the notion was to
mingle unobtrusively with whatever crowd chanced to be there and to
keep eyes and ears open for whatever happened to transpire.

Candlestick Passage, unfamiliar to Hetherwick until that evening,
proved to be one of the many narrow alleys which open out of St.
Martin's Lane in the neighbourhood of the theatres.  It wore a very
commonplace, not to say shabby complexion, and there was nothing in its
atmosphere to suggest adventure or romance.  Not was there anything
alluring about the entrance to Vivian's, which was merely a wide,
double doorway, ornamented by two evergreen shrubs set in tubs and
revealing swing-doors within, and a carpeted staircase beyond.
Hetherwick and Matherfield, however, never reached swing-doors or
staircase: as they approached the outer entrance a tall woman emerged,
and without so much as a look right or left turned down the passage
towards the street.  She paid no attention to the two men as she walked
quickly past them--but Hetherwick softly seized his companion's arm.

"Lady Riversreade, by all that's wonderful!" he exclaimed under his
breath.  "That woman!"

Matherfield turned sharply, gazing after the retreating figure.

"That," he said incredulously, "coming out of here?  Certain?"

"Dead sure!" affirmed Hetherwick.  "I knew her at once--I'd had a
particularly good look at her, yesterday.  That's she!"

"What's she doing at Vivian's?" muttered Matherfield.  "Queer, that!"

"But she's going away from it," said Hetherwick.  "Come on!--let's see
where she goes.  We can easily come back here.  But why not follow her
first?"

"Good!" agreed Matherfield.  "Come on then! easily keep her in sight."

Lady Riversreade at that moment was turning out of the passage, to her
left hand.  When the two men emerged from it, she was already several
yards ahead, going towards St. Martin's Church.  Her tall figure made
her good to follow, but Matherfield kept Hetherwick back; no use, he
said, in pressing too closely on your quarry.

"Tall as she is and tall as we are," he whispered, as they threaded in
out of the crowds on the pavement, "we can spot her at twenty yards.
Cautiously, now--she's making for the cab rank!"

They watched Lady Riversreade charter and enter a taxi-cab: in another
minute it moved away.  But it had scarcely moved when Matherfield was
at the door of the next cab on the rank.

"You saw that cab go off with a tall woman in it?" he said to the
driver.  "There!--just rounding the corner, know its driver?
Right!--follow it carefully.  Note where it stops, and if the woman
gets out.  Drive slowly past wherever that is, and then pull up a bit
farther on.  Be sharp, now--this is----" he bent towards the man and
whispered a word or two: a second later he and Hetherwick were in the
cab and across the top side of Trafalgar Square.

"This is getting a bit thick, Mr. Hetherwick," remarked Matherfield.
"Your clerk tracks his man to Vivian's on Friday night, we find Lady
Riversreade coming out of Vivian's on Monday night.  Now I shouldn't
think Lady Riversreade, whom we hear of chiefly as a humanitarian, a
likely sort of lady to visit Vivian's!"

"She came out of Vivian's, anyway!" replied Hetherwick.

"Then, of course, she'd been in!" said Matherfield.  "But why?  I
should say--to have a meeting with Baseverie, or with somebody
representing him, or having something to do with the business that took
him to Riversreade Court.  What business is it?  Has it anything to do
with our business?  However, there's Lady Riversreade in that cab in
front, and we'll just follow her to find out where she goes--no doubt
she's bound for some swell West End hotel.  And that knowledge will be
useful, for I may want to see her in the morning--to ask a question or
two."

"Somewhat early for that, isn't it?" suggested Hetherwick.  "Do we know
enough?"

"Depends on what you call enough," replied Matherfield dryly.  "What I
know is this: that man Granett was poisoned.  He had on him a brand new
five-pound note.  That note I've traced as far as Vivian's, where it
was certainly paid to some customer in change on the very day before
Granett and Hannaford's deaths: Vivian's is accordingly a place of
interest.  Now I hear of a mysterious man visiting Lady
Riversreade--the man is tracked to Vivian's--I myself see Lady
Riversreade emerging from Vivian's.  I think I must ask Lady
Riversreade what she knows about Vivian's and a certain Dr. Baseverie,
and, incidentally, if she ever heard of a place called Sellithwaite and
a police-superintendent named Hannaford?  Eh!  But we're leaving the
region of the fashionable hotels."

Hetherwick looked out of the window, what he saw seemed unfamiliar.

"We're going up Edgware Road," said Matherfield.  He leaned out of the
cab and gave some further instructions to the driver.  "I don't want to
arouse any suspicion there in front," he remarked, dropping into his
seat again.  "The probability is that she's going to some private
house, and I don't want her to get any idea that she's followed.
Ah!--now we turn into Harrow Road."

The cab went away by Paddington Green, turned sharply at the Town Hall,
and made up St. Mary's Terrace.  Presently it slowed down; proceeded
still more slowly; passed the other cab which had come to a standstill
in front of a block of high buildings; a few yards farther on it
stopped altogether.  The driver got down from his seat and came to the
door.

"That tall lady!" he said confidentially.  "Her as got into the other
cab.  She's gone into St. Mary's Mansions--just below."

"Flats, aren't they?" asked Matherfield.

"That's it, sir," answered the driver.  He looked down the street.
"Cab's going off again, sir.  Porter came out and paid."

"That looks as if she was going to stay here awhile," remarked
Matherfield in an undertone.  "Well, we'll get out, too, and take a
look round."  He paid and dismissed the driver, and crossing over to
the opposite side of the roadway, pointed out to Hetherwick the block
of flats into which Lady Riversreade had disappeared.  "Big place," he
muttered.  "Regular rabbit-warren.  However, no other entrance than
this--the old burial ground's at the back, no way out there, I do know
that!  So she can't very well vanish that way."

"You're going to wait, then?" asked Hetherwick.

"I don't believe in starting out on any game unless I see it through,"
replied Matherfield.  "Yes, I think we'll wait.  But there's no
necessity to hang around in the open street.  I know this
district--used to be at the police station round the corner.  You see
all these houses on this side, Mr. Hetherwick?  They're all
lodging-houses, and I know most of their keepers.  Wait here a minute,
and I'll soon get a room that we can watch from, without being seen
ourselves."

He left Hetherwick standing under the shadow of a neighbouring high
wall, and went a little way down the street.  Hetherwick heard him open
the gate of one of the little gardens and knock at a door.  There some
little delay.  Hetherwick passed the time in staring at the long rows
of lighted windows in the flats opposite, wondering to which of them
Lady Riversreade had gone and what she was doing there at all.  It was
clear to him that this was some adventure connected with the mysterious
Baseverie and with Vivian's Night Club--but how, and of what nature?

Matherfield came back presently, cheerful and reassuring.

"Come along, Mr. Hetherwick!" he whispered.  "There's a man
here--lodging-house keeper--who knows me.  We can have his front
parlour window to watch from.  Far better that than patrolling the
street.  We shall be comfortable there."

"You're intent on watching, then?" said Hetherwick as they moved off.

"I'm not coming all that way for nothing," replied Matherfield.  "I'm
going to follow her up till she settles for the night.  That won't be
here; she'll be off to some hotel or other before long."

But Matherfield's prediction proved to be faulty.  Time dragged slowly
by in the stuffy and shabby little room in which he and Hetherwick took
up a position and from the window of which Matherfield kept a constant
watch on the entrance of the flats, exactly opposite.  Midnight came
and went, but nothing happened.  And at half-past twelve Hetherwick
suggested that the game wasn't worth the candle, and that he should
prefer to depart.

"You do as you like, Mr. Hetherwick," said Matherfield, stifling a
suspicious yawn.  "I'm sick enough of it, too.  But here I stop till
she comes out--whether it's this side of breakfast or the other side!"

"And what then?" asked Hetherwick, half derisively.

"Then we'll see--or I'll see, if you're going--where she goes next!
Don't believe in half measures!" retorted Matherfield.

"Oh, I'll see it out!" said Hetherwick.  "After all, it'll be daylight
soon."

Daylight came over the house-tops at four o'clock.  They had seen
nothing up to then.  But at twenty minutes to five Matherfield tugged
his companion's arm.  Lady Riversreade, in a big ulster travelling-coat
and carrying a small suit-case, was emerging alone from the opposite
door.




CHAPTER XII

_ALIAS_ MADAME LISTORELLE

The woman thus observed marched swiftly away down the deserted street
in the direction of the Town Hall at the corner, and Matherfield, after
one more searching look at her, dropped the slat of the Venetian blind
through which he had been peeping, and turned on his companion.  At the
same instant he reached a hand for his overcoat and hat.

"Now, Mr. Hetherwick," he said sharply, "this has got to be a one-man
job!  There'll be nothing extraordinary in one man going along the
streets to catch an early morning train, but it would look a bit
suspicious if two men went together on the same errand and the same
track!  I'm off after her!  I'll run her down!  I'm used to that sort
of thing.  You go to your chambers and get some sleep.  I'll look in
later and tell you what news I have.  Sharp's the word, now!"

He was out of the room and the house within the next few seconds, and
Hetherwick, half vexed with himself for having lingered there on a job
which Matherfield thus unceremoniously took into his own hands,
prepared to follow.  Presently he went out into the shabby hall; the
man of the house was just coming downstairs, stifling a big yawn.  He
smiled knowingly when he saw Hetherwick.

"Matherfield gone, sir?" he inquired.  "I heard the door close."

"He's gone," assented Hetherwick.  "The person he wanted appeared
suddenly, and he's gone in pursuit."

The man, a smug-faced, easy-going sort of person, smiled again.

"Rum doings these police have!" he remarked.  "Queer job, watching all
night through a window.  I was just coming down to make you a cup of
coffee," he continued.  "I'll get you one in a few minutes, if you
like.  Or tea now?  Perhaps you'd prefer tea?"

"It's very good of you," said Hetherwick.  "But to tell you the truth
I'd rather get home and to bed.  Many thanks, all the same."

Then, out of sheer good nature, he slipped a treasury note into the
man's hand, and, bidding him good morning, went away.  He, too, walked
down the street in the direction taken by Lady Riversreade and her
pursuer.  But when he came to the bottom and emerged into Harrow Road
he saw nothing of them, either to left or right.  The road, however,
was not deserted; there were already workmen going to early morning
tasks, and close by the corner of the Town Hall a roadman was busy with
his broom.  Hetherwick went up to him.

"Did you see a lady, and then a gentleman, come down here, from St.
Mary's Terrace, just now?" he asked.  "Tall people, both of them."

The man rested on his broom, half turned, and pointed towards
Paddington Bridge.

"I see 'em, guv'nor," he answered.  "Tall lady, carrying a little
portmantle.  Gone along over the bridge yonder.  Paddington station
way.  And, after her, Matherfield."

"Oh, you know him, do you?" exclaimed Hetherwick, in surprise.

The man jerked a thumb in the direction of the adjacent police station.

"Used to be a sergeant here, did Matherfield," he replied.  "I knows
him, right enough!  Once run me in--me an' a mate o' mine--for bein' a
bit festive like.  Five bob and costs that was.  But I don't bear him
no grudge, not me!  Thank 'ee, guv'nor."

Hetherwick left another tip behind him and walked slowly off towards
Edgware Road.  The Tube trains were just beginning to run, and he
caught a south-bound one and went down to Charing Cross and thence to
the Temple.  And at six o'clock he tumbled into bed, and slept soundly
until, four hours later, he heard Mapperley moving about in the
adjoining room.

Mapperley, whose job at Hetherwick's was a good deal of a sinecure, was
leisurely reading the news when his master entered.  He laid the paper
aside, and gave Hetherwick a knowing glance.

"Got some more information last night," he said.  "About that chap I
tracked the other day."

"How did you get it?" asked Hetherwick.

"Put in a bit of time at Vivian's," answered Mapperley.  "There's a
fellow there that I know.  Clerk to the secretary chap, named Flowers.
That man Baseverie has a share in the place--sort of director, I think."

"What time were you at Vivian's?" inquired Hetherwick.  "Late or early?"

"Early--for them," answered Mapperley.

"Did you see the man there?"

"I did.  He was there all the time I was.  In and about all the time.
But at first he was in what seemed to be serious conversation with a
tall, handsome woman.  They sat talking in an alcove in the lounge
there some time.  Then she went off--alone."

"Oh, you saw that, did you?" said Hetherwick.  "Well, I may as well
tell you, since you know what you do, that the woman was Lady
Riversreade!"

"Oh, I guessed that!" remarked Mapperley.  "I figured in that at once.
But that wasn't all.  I found out more.  That dead man, Hannaford--from
what I heard from Flowers--I've no doubt whatever that Hannaford was at
Vivian's once, if not twice, during the two or three nights before his
death.  Anyway, Flowers recognised my description of him--which I'd
got, of course, from you and the papers."

"Hannaford.  There, eh?" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Alone?"

"No--came in with this Baseverie.  They don't know him as Dr. Baseverie
there, though.  Plain Mister.  I'm quite sure it was Hannaford who was
with him."

"Did you get the exact dates--and times?" asked Hetherwick.

"I didn't.  Flowers couldn't say that.  But he remembered such a man."

"Well, that's something," said Hetherwick.  He turned into another room
and sat down to his breakfast, thinking.  "Mapperley, come here!" he
called presently.  "Look here," he went on as the clerk came in.
"Since you know this Vivian place, go there again to-night, and try to
find out if that friend of yours knows anything of a tall man who
corresponds to the description of the man whom Hannaford was seen to
meet at Victoria.  You read Ledbitter's account of that, given at the
inquest?"

"Yes," replied Mapperley.  "But of what value is it?  None--for
practical purposes!  He couldn't even tell the shape of the man's nose,
nor the colour of his eyes!  All he could tell was that he saw a man
muffled in such a fashion that he saw next to nothing of his face, and
that he was tall and smartly dressed.  There are a few tens of
thousands--scores, perhaps--of tall, smartly-dressed men in London!"

"Never mind--inquire," said Hetherwick, "and particularly if such a man
has ever been seen in Baseverie's company there."

He finished his breakfast, and then, instead of going down to the
Central Criminal Court, after his usual habit, he hung about in his
chambers, expecting Matherfield.  But Matherfield did not come, and at
noon Hetherwick, impelled by a new idea, left a message for him in case
he called, and went out.  In pursuance of the idea, he journeyed once
more to the regions of Paddington and knocked at the door of the house
wherein he and Matherfield had kept watch on the flats opposite.

The lodging-house keeper opened the door himself and grinned on seeing
Hetherwick.  Hetherwick stepped inside and nodded at the door of the
room which he had left only a few hours before.

"I want a word or two with you," he said.  "In private."

"Nobody in here, sir," replied the man.  "Come in."

He closed the door on himself and his visitor, and offered Hetherwick a
chair.

"I expected you'd be back during the day," he said, with a sly smile.
"Either you or Matherfield, or both!"

"You haven't seen him again?" asked Hetherwick.

"No; he's not been here," replied the man.

"Well, I wanted to ask you a question," continued Hetherwick.  "Perhaps
two or three.  To begin with, have you lived here long?"

"Been here since before these flats were built--and that's a good many
years ago; I can't say exactly how many," said the other, glancing at
the big block opposite his window.  "Twenty-two or three, anyway."

"Then I dare say you know most of the people hereabouts?" suggested
Hetherwick.  "By sight, at any rate."

The lodging-house keeper smiled and shook his head.

"That would be a tall order, mister!" he answered.  "There's a few
thousand of people packed into this bit of London.  Of course, I do
know a good many, close at hand.  But if you're a Londoner you'll know
that Londoners keep themselves to themselves.  May seem queer, but it's
a fact that I don't know the names of my next-door neighbours on either
side--though to be sure they've only been here a few years in either
case."

"What I was suggesting," said Hetherwick, "was that you probably knew
by sight many of the people who live in the flats opposite your house."

"Oh, I know some of 'em by sight," assented the man.  "They're a mixed
lot over in those flats!  A few old gentlemen--retired--two or three
old ladies--and a fair lot of actresses--very popular with the stage is
those flats.  But, of course, it is only by sight--I don't know any of
'em by name.  Just see them going in and coming out, you know."

"Do you happen to know by sight a tall, handsome woman who has a flat
there?" asked Hetherwick.  "A woman who's likely to be very well
dressed?"

The lodging-house keeper, who was without his coat and had the sleeves
of his shirt rolled up, scratched his elbows and looked thoughtful.

"I think I do know the lady you mean," he said at last.  "Goes out with
one o' those pesky little poms--a black 'un--on a lead?  That her?"

"I don't know anything about a dog," replied Hetherwick.  "The woman I
mean is, as I said, tall, handsome, distinguished-looking, fair hair
and a fresh complexion, and about forty or so."

"I dare say that's the one I'm thinking of," said the man.  "I have
seen such a lady now and then--not of late, though."  Then he gave
Hetherwick a shrewd, inquiring glance.  "You and Matherfield after
her?" he asked.

"Not exactly that," answered Hetherwick.  "What I want to find
out--now--is her name.  The name she's known by here, anyway."

"I can soon settle that for you," said the lodging-house keeper with
alacrity.  "I know the caretaker of those flats well enough--often have
a talk with him.  He'll tell me anything--between ourselves.  Now then,
let's get it right--a tall, handsome lady, about forty, fair hair,
fresh complexion, well dressed.  That it, mister?"

"You've got it," said Hetherwick.

"Then you wait here a bit, and I'll slip across," said the man.  "All
on the strict between ourselves, you know.  As I said, the caretaker
and me's pals."

He left the room, and a moment later Hetherwick saw him cross the road
and descend into the basement of the flats.  Within a quarter of an
hour he was back, and evidently primed with news.

"Soon settled that for you, mister!" he announced triumphantly.  "He
knew who you meant!  The lady's name is Madame Listorelle.  Here, I got
him to write it down on a bit o' paper, not being used to foreign
names.  He thinks she's something to do with the stage.  She's the
tenant of flat twenty-six.  But he says that of late she's seldom
there--comes for a night or two, then away, maybe for months at a time.
He saw her here yesterday, though; she hadn't been there, he says, for
a good bit.  But there, it don't signify to him whether she's there or
away--always punctual with her money, and that's the main thing, ain't
it?"

Hetherwick added to his largess of the early morning, and went away.
He was now convinced that Lady Riversreade, for some purpose of her
own, kept up a flat in Paddington, visited it occasionally, and was
known there as Madame Listorelle.  How much was there in that, and what
bearing had it on the problem he was endeavouring to solve?




CHAPTER XIII

WHO WAS SHE?

Late that night, when Hetherwick was thinking things over, a pounding
on his stairs and a knock on his outer door heralded the entrance of
Matherfield, who, with an expressive look, flung himself into the
nearest easy chair.

"For heaven's sake, Mr. Hetherwick, give me a drop of that whisky!" he
exclaimed.  "I'm dead beat--and dead disappointed, too!  Such a day as
I've had after that woman!  And what it all means the Lord only
knows--I don't!"

Hetherwick helped his evidently far-spent visitor to a whisky and soda,
and waited until he had taken a hearty pull at it.  Then he resumed his
own seat and took up his pipe.

"I gather that you haven't had a very successful day, Matherfield?" he
suggested.  "Hope it wasn't exactly a wild-goose chase?"

"That's just about what it comes to, then!" exclaimed Matherfield.
"Anyway, after taking no end of trouble she got clear away, practically
under my very nose!  But I'll tell you all about it; that's what I
dropped in for.  When I went out of that house in St. Mary's Terrace,
she was just turning the corner to the right, Bishop's Road way.  Of
course I followed.  She went over the bridge--the big railway
bridge--and at the end turned down to Paddington Station.  I concluded
then that she was going up by some early morning train.  She entered
the station by the first-class booking office; I was not so many yards
in her rear then.  But instead of stopping there and taking a ticket
she went right through, crossed the station to the arrival platform and
signalled to a taxi-cab.  In another minute she was in it, and off.
Very luckily there was another cab close by.  I hailed that and told
the driver to keep the first cab in sight and follow it to wherever it
went.  So off we went again, on another pursuit!  And it ended at
another terminus--Waterloo!"

"Going home, I suppose," remarked Hetherwick, as Matherfield paused to
take up his glass.  "You can get to Dorking from Waterloo."

"She wasn't going to any Dorking!" answered Matherfield.  "I soon found
that out.  Early as it was, there were a lot of people at Waterloo, and
when she went to the ticket office I contrived to be close behind
her--close enough, at any rate, to overhear anything she said.  She
asked for a first single to Southampton."

"Southampton!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Um!"

"Southampton!" repeated Matherfield.  "First single for Southampton.
She took the ticket and walked away, looking neither right nor left;
she never glanced at me.  Well, as I said yesterday, I don't believe in
starting out on anything unless I go clean through with it.  So after a
minute's thought I booked for Southampton--third.  Then I went out and
looked at the notice board.  Southampton, 5.40.  It was then 5.25.  So
I went to the telephone office, rang up our head-quarters and told 'em
I was after something and they needn't expect to see me all day.  Then
I bought a time-table and a newspaper or two at the bookstall, just
opening, and went to the train.  There were a lot of people travelling
by it.  The train hadn't come up to the platform then; when it came
down a minute or two later I watched her get in; she was good to spot
because of her tall figure.  I got into a smoker, a bit lower down, and
in due course off we went, me wondering, to tell you the truth,
precisely why I was going!  But I was going--wherever she went."

"Even out of the country?" asked Hetherwick, with a smile.

"Aye, I thought of that!" assented Matherfield.  "She might be slinging
her hook for anything I knew.  That made me turn to the steamship news
in the paper, and I saw then that the _Tartaric_ was due to leave
Southampton for New York about two o'clock that very afternoon.  Well,
there were more improbable things than that she meant to go by it, for
reasons of her own, especially if she really is the Mrs. Whittingham of
the Sellithwaite affair ten years ago.  You see, I thought it out like
this--granting she's Mrs. Whittingham, that was, she'll be astute
enough to know that there's no time-limit to a criminal prosecution in
this country, and that she's still liable to arrest, prosecution, and
conviction; she'd probably know, too, that this Hannaford affair has
somehow drawn fresh attention to her little matter, and that she's in
danger.  Again, I'd been working out an idea about her and this man
Baseverie.  How do we know that Baseverie wasn't an accomplice of hers
in that Sellithwaite fraud?  In most cases of that sort the woman has
an accomplice somewhere in the background--Baseverie may have been
mixed with her then.  And now he may have information that has led him
to warn her to make herself scarce, eh?"

"There's something in that, Matherfield," admitted Hetherwick.
"Yes--decidedly something."

"There may be a good deal," affirmed Matherfield.  "You see, we've let
those newspaper chaps have a lot of information.  I'm a believer in
making use of the Press; it's a valuable aid sometimes, perhaps
generally, but there are other times when you can do too much of it:
it's a sort of giving valuable aid to the enemy.  I don't know whether
we haven't let those reporters know too much in this case.  We've let
'em know, for instance, about the portrait found in Hannaford's
pocket-book, and about the sealed packet in which, we believe, was the
secret of his patent: all that's been in the papers, though, to be
sure, they didn't make much copy out of it.  Still, there was enough
for anybody who followed the case closely.  Now, supposing that
Baseverie was Mrs. Whittingham's accomplice ten years ago, and that
he'd read all this and seen the reproduction of the portrait, wouldn't
he see that she was in some danger and warn her?  I think it likely,
and I wish we hadn't been quite so free with our news for those paper
chaps.  I'm glad, anyhow, that there's one thing I haven't told 'em
of--that medicine bottle found at Granett's!  There's nobody but me,
you, and the medical men know of that, so far."

"You think this woman--Lady Riversreade as she is, Mrs. Whittingham as
she used to be--was making off to Southampton, and possibly farther, on
a hint from Baseverie?" said Hetherwick ruminatively.

"Put it this way," replied Matherfield.  "Of course, you've got to
assume a lot, but we can't do without assuming things in this business.
Lady Riversreade was formerly Mrs. Whittingham.  Mrs. Whittingham did a
clever bit of fraud at Sellithwaite, and got away with the swag.
Baseverie was her accomplice.  Now then, ten years later Mrs.
Whittingham has become my Lady Riversreade, a very wealthy woman.
She's suddenly visited by Baseverie at Riversreade Court, and is
obviously upset by his first visit.  He comes again.  Three nights
later she's seen to come out of a club which he frequents.  She spends
most of the night in a flat in a quiet part of London, and next morning
slopes off as early as five o'clock to a port--Southampton.  What
inference is to be drawn?  That her visit to Southampton has certainly
something to do with Baseverie's visits to her and her visit to
Vivian's!"

"I think there's something in that, too," said Hetherwick, "But--we're
on the way to Southampton.  Go on!"

"Very good train, that," continued Matherfield.  "We got to Southampton
just before eight--a minute or two late.  I was wanting something to
eat and drink by that time, and I was glad to see my lady turn into the
refreshment-room as soon as she left her carriage.  So did I.  I knew
she'd never suspect a quiet, ordinary man like me; if she deigned to
give me a glance--she's a very haughty-looking woman, I observed--she'd
only take me for a commercial traveller.  And we were not so far off
each other in that room; she sat at a little table, having some tea and
so on: I was at the counter.  Of course, I never showed that I was
taking any notice of her--but I got in two or three good, comprehensive
inspections.  Very good-looking, no doubt of it, Mr. Hetherwick--a
woman that's worn well!  But of course you've seen that for yourself."

"You must remember that I've only seen her twice," remarked Hetherwick,
with a laugh.  "Once at Victoria, when Miss Hannaford pointed her out;
once night before last, when it was by a poorish gaslight.  But I'll
take your word, Matherfield.  Well, and what happened next?"

"Oh, she took her time over her tea and toast," continued Matherfield.
"Very leisured in all her movements, I assure you.  At last she moved
off--of course I followed, casually and carelessly.  Now, as you may be
aware, Southampton West, where the train set us down, is a bit out of
the town, and I expected her to take a cab.  But she didn't; she walked
away from the station.  So did I--twenty or thirty yards in the rear.
She took her time; it seemed to me she was purposely loitering.  It
struck me at last why--she was waiting until the business offices were
open.  I was right in that: as soon as the town clocks struck nine she
quickened her pace and made a beeline for her objective.  And what do
you think that was?"

"No idea," said Hetherwick.

"White Star offices!" answered Matherfield.  "Went straight there, and
walked straight in!  Of course, I waited outside, where she wouldn't
see me when she came out again.  She was in there about twenty minutes.
When she came out she turned to another part of the town.  And near
that old gateway, or bar, or whatever it is that stands across the
street, I lost her--altogether!"

"Some exceptional reason, I should think, Matherfield," remarked
Hetherwick.  "How was it?"

"My own stupid fault!" growled Matherfield.  "Took my eye off her in a
particularly crowded part--the town was beginning to get very busy.  I
just happened to let my attention be diverted--and she was gone!  At
first I made certain she'd gone into some shop.  I looked into
several--risky as that was--but I couldn't find her.  I hung about; no
good.  Then I came to the conclusion that she'd turned down one of the
side streets or alleys or passages--there were several about there--and
got clean away.  And after hanging around a bit, and going up one
street and down another--a poor job in our business at the best of
times and all dependent on mere luck!--I decided to make a bold stroke
and be sure of at any rate something."

"What?  How?" asked Hetherwick.

"I thought I'd find out what she'd gone to the White Star offices for,"
replied Matherfield.  "Of course, I didn't want to raise any suspicion
against her under the circumstances.  But I flatter myself I'm a bit of
a diplomatist, and I laid my plans.  I went in there, got hold of a
clerk who was a likely looking chap for secret keeping, told him who I
was and showed my credentials, and asked him for the information I
wanted.  I got it.  As luck would have it, my man had attended to her
himself and remembered her quite well.  Of course, little more than an
hour and a half had passed since she'd been in there."

"And--what had she been in for?" asked Hetherwick.  "What did you hear?"

Matherfield nodded significantly.

"Just what I expected to hear," he answered.  "She'd booked a
second-class passage for New York in the _Tartaric_, sailing that
afternoon, in the name of H. Cunningham.  As soon as I found that out,
I knew I should come across her again--there'd be no need to go raking
the town for her.  I ascertained that passengers would be allowed to go
aboard from two o'clock; the boat would sail between five and six.  So,
having once more admonished the clerk to secrecy and given him
plausible excuses for my inquisitiveness, I went off to relax a bit,
and in due time sat down to an early and comfortable lunch--a man must
take his ease now and then, you know, Mr. Hetherwick."

"Exactly, Matherfield--I quite agree," said Hetherwick.  "But I dare
say your brain was at work, all the same, while you ate and drank?"

"It was, sir," assented Matherfield.  "Yes--I made my plans.  I wasn't
going to New York, of course; that was out of the question.  But I was
going to have speech with her.  I decided that I'd watch for her coming
aboard the _Tartaric_--being alone, she'd probably come early.  I
proposed to get her aside, accosting her, of course, as Lady
Riversreade, tell her who I was and show my papers, and ask her if she
would give me any information about a certain Dr. Cyprian Baseverie.  I
thought I'd see how she took that before asking anything further; if I
saw that she was taken aback, confused, and especially if she gave me
any prevaricating or elusive answer, I'd ask her straight out if before
her marriage to the late Sir John Riversreade she was the Mrs.
Whittingham who, some ten years ago, stayed for a time at the White
Hart Hotel at Sellithwaite.  And I practically made up my mind, too,
that if she admitted that and I saw good cause for it, I'd detain her."

"You meant to go as far as that?" exclaimed Hetherwick.

"I did!  I should have been justified," replied Matherfield.  "However,
that's neither here nor there, for I never saw her!  I was down at the
point of departure well before two, and I assured myself that nobody
had gone aboard the _Tartaric_ up to that time.  I kept as sharp a look
out as any man with only one pair of eyes could, right away from ten
minutes to two until five-and-twenty past five, when the boat sailed,
but she never turned up.  Of course you'll say that she must have
slipped on unobserved by me, but I'm positive she didn't.  No, sir!
It's my opinion that she thought better of it and didn't go--forfeiting
her passage money, or a part of it, would be nothing to a woman of her
means--or that she was frightened at the last minute of showing herself
on that stage!"

"Frightened!  Why?" asked Hetherwick.

Matherfield laughed significantly.

"There were two or three of our men from Scotland Yard about," he
answered.  "I'm not aware of what they were after; I didn't ask 'em.
But I did ask them to give me a hand in looking out for a lady whom I
fully described--which is why I'm dead certain she never went aboard.
Now, it may have been that she came down there, knew--you never
know!--some of those chaps and--made herself scarce!  Anyway--I never
set eyes on her.  Never, in fact, saw her again after I lost her in the
morning.  So--that's where I am!"

"You came back--defeated?" remarked Hetherwick.

"Well, if you like to call it so," admitted Matherfield.  "Yes, I came
back by the seven thirty-eight.  Dog tired!  But I'm not through with
this yet, Mr. Hetherwick, and I want you to do something for me.  This
Miss Hannaford, now, is down at Riversreade Court.  They'll be on the
telephone there, of course.  I want you to ring her up early to-morrow
morning, and ask her if she can meet you on important private business
in Dorking town at noon.  Where shall we say?"

"'White Horse' would do," suggested Hetherwick.

"Very well--White Horse Hotel, at noon," agreed Matherfield.  "We'll go
down--for I'll go with you--by the 10.10 from Victoria.  Now please be
very careful about this, Mr. Hetherwick, when you telephone.  Don't say
anything of any reason for going down to Dorking.  Don't on any account
mention Lady Riversreade, in any way.  Merely tell Miss Hannaford that
you have urgent reasons for seeing her.  And--fix it up!"

"Oh, I can fix it up all right," answered Hetherwick.  "Miss Hannaford
can easily drive down from Riversreade Court.  But I don't know what
you want her for."

"Wait till morning," replied Matherfield, with a knowing look.  "You'll
see.  I'll meet you at Victoria at ten o'clock, sharp."




CHAPTER XIV

IS IT BLACKMAIL?

Hetherwick was still in ignorance of the reason of Matherfield's desire
to see Rhona when, just before noon next day, Matherfield and he walked
up from Dorking Station into the High Street, and made for the "White
Horse."  Matherfield halted a few yards away from its door.

"Let's wait outside for her," he said.  "Till I've asked her a question
or two.  I don't want to even run the risk of being overheard."

Rhona came along in a car a few minutes later, and seeing the two men
advanced to meet them.  Matherfield lost no time in getting to business.

"Miss Hannaford," he said, with a cautious look round, and in a low
voice, "just tell me--is Lady Riversreade up there at the Court?  She
is!" he continued, as Rhona nodded.  "When did she come back, then?"

"Very early yesterday morning," answered Rhona promptly.  "By the 7.45
from Victoria.  She was up at the Court by 9.30."

Matherfield turned an utterly perplexed face on Hetherwick.  Then he
stared at Rhona.

"Up at Riversreade Court at 9.30 yesterday--Tuesday--morning!" he
exclaimed.  "Impossible!  I saw her at Southampton at 9.30 yesterday
morning with my own eyes."

"I'm quite sure you didn't!" replied Rhona, with a satirical laugh.
"You're under some queer mistaken impression, Mr. Matherfield.  Lady
Riversreade was in her own house, here, with me at 9.30 yesterday
morning.  That's a fact that I can vouch for!"

The two men looked at each other.  Each seemed to be asking the other a
silent question.  But Matherfield suddenly voiced his, in tones full of
wonder and of chagrin.

"Then who on earth is that woman that I followed to Southampton?"

Matherfield's question went without answer.  Rhona, who had no idea of
what he was talking about, turned a surprised and inquiring look on
Hetherwick.  And Hetherwick saw that the time had come for a lot of
explanation.

"Look here!" he said.  "We've got to do some talking, and we can't keep
Miss Hannaford standing in the street.  Come into the hotel--we'll get
a private room for lunch, and then we can discuss matters all to
ourselves.  You're a bit puzzled by all this," he continued a few
minutes later, turning to Rhona when all three were safely closeted
together, and lunch had been ordered.  "And no wonder!  But I'd better
tell you what Matherfield and I were after on Monday night, and what
Matherfield was doing all yesterday.  You see," he concluded, after
giving Rhona an epitomised account of the recent proceedings, "I was
absolutely certain that the woman whom we saw coming out of Vivian's on
Monday night was the woman you pointed out to me on Sunday morning at
Victoria as Lady Riversreade--she was dressed in just the same things,
I'm positive!--in short I'm convinced it was Lady Riversreade.  Then,
Matherfield and I are both equally sure that that was the same woman we
saw coming out of St. Mary's Mansions shortly before five o'clock
yesterday morning, and whom Matherfield followed to Southampton, Up to
now, we've never had a doubt that it was Lady Riversreade--not a doubt!"

"Well," said Rhona, with an incredulous laugh, "I can't say, of course,
that you didn't see Lady Riversreade come out of Vivian's on Monday
night.  Lady Riversreade was certainly in town from Sunday noon to
yesterday morning, and she may have gone to Vivian's on Monday night
for purposes of her own.  I know nothing about that.  But I do know
that she was not in Southampton yesterday, for, as I told you, she was
back home at Riversreade Court, about half-past nine in the morning,
and she's never left the house since.  That's plain fact!"

"It's beyond me, then!" exclaimed Matherfield.  "And I say again, if
that wasn't Lady Riversreade that I tracked to Southampton, who was it?
I'll say more--if that really was Lady Riversreade that we saw coming
out of Vivian's, and followed to Paddington, and if she wasn't the
woman who came out of those flats yesterday morning, and that I went
after, well, then, Lady Riversreade has a double--who lives in St.
Mary's Mansions!  That's about it!"

"As regards that," remarked Hetherwick.  "I didn't tell you last night,
Matherfield, that I went back yesterday to that house from which we
watched, and made some cautious inquiries about the tall, handsome
woman who has a flat opposite.  I got some information.  The woman whom
we followed there, and whom you were running after yesterday is known
there as a Madame Listorelle.  She's very little at her flat, though
punctual with its rent.  She's sometimes away altogether for long
periods--in fact, she's rarely seen there.  And she's believed to be
connected with the stage.  The caretaker who supplied this information
saw her at the flat on Monday."

Matherfield smacked one hand on the open palm of the other.

"It's an alias!" he exclaimed.  "Bet your stars she's Lady Riversreade!
Away from her flat for long periods?  Of course--because she's down
here, at her big house.  Keeps that flat up for some purpose of her
own, and calls herself--what is it?--sounds French."

"But supposing that's so," remarked Hetherwick, with a sly glance at
Rhona.  "It's utterly impossible that Lady Riversreade could be at
Riversreade Court yesterday, and in Southampton at the same time!
Come, now!"

"Well, I tell you it beats me!" muttered Matherfield.  "I know what I
saw!  If there's anything gone wrong, it's your fault, Mr. Hetherwick!
I don't know this Lady Riversreade!  All I know is that you said the
woman we saw coming out of that club was Lady Riversreade.  That, sir,
is the woman I followed!"

"The woman I saw coming out of Vivian's was the woman pointed out to me
by Miss Hannaford as Lady Riversreade," affirmed Hetherwick quietly.
"That's certain!  But----"

He was interrupted at this stage by the arrival of lunch.  Nothing more
was said until all three were seated, and the waiter had been sent
away.  Then Rhona looked at her companions and smiled.

"You both seem to have arrived at a very promising stage!" she said.
"At first I thought it a regular impasse, but----"

"Isn't it?" asked Hetherwick.  "At present I don't see any way through
or over it."

"Oh, I think you're getting towards something!" she retorted.  "All
these things, puzzling as they are, are better than nothing.  I've got
some news, too--if you're sure there are no eavesdroppers about."

"Oh, we're all right!" said Hetherwick.  "Good stout old doors,
these--close-fitting.  What next?"

Rhona leaned across the table a little, and lowered her voice.

"There was a sort of row at the Court; at least, at the Home,
yesterday," she said.  "With that man Baseverie!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "That's interesting!  Tell about it."

"Well, I told you that Lady Riversreade arrived from London yesterday
morning about nine-thirty," continued Rhona.  "Major Penteney arrived
with her."

"Who's Major Penteney?" demanded Matherfield.

"He's a retired Army man who's greatly interested in Lady Riversreade's
Home, and looks after its affairs in London," replied Hetherwick.  "And
Miss Hannaford thinks he's in love with the foundress.  I've seen
him--saw him with Lady Riversreade on Sunday.  Yes," he added, turning
to Rhona, "Major Penteney came back with her?  Go on."

"As soon as they arrived--I saw them come, from my office window--they
came across to the Home," continued Rhona.  "It struck me that they
both looked unusually grave and serious.  They talked to me for a few
minutes on business matters: then they went into Lady Riversreade's
private office.  They were there for some little time; then Lady
Riversreade came out and went away; I saw her cross to the Court.
Presently Major Penteney came to me, and told me that he wanted to have
a little private talk with me.  He said--as near as I can
remember--'Miss Featherstone----'"

Matherfield looked up quickly from his plate.

"Eh?" he said.  "Miss--Featherstone?"

"That's the name Miss Hannaford's known by--there," said Hetherwick.
"Her mother's name.  I told you before, you know."

"True, true!" assented Matherfield, with a groan.  "You did--I remember
now.  I'm muddled--with yesterday's affair."

"'Miss Featherstone,' Rhona went on--'I believe you're aware that Lady
Riversreade has lately been visited--twice--by a man who called himself
Dr. Cyprian Baseverie?'

"'Yes,' I answered, 'I am, Major Penteney.  I saw Dr. Baseverie on both
occasions.'  'Well,' he said--'I don't suppose you were at all
impressed by him?' 'Not at all impressed, Major Penteney,' I replied,
'except very unfavourably.'  'Didn't like his looks, eh,' he asked with
a smile.  'Do you?' I inquired.  'I've never seen the fellow,' he
answered.  'But I expect to--this very morning.  That's what I want to
talk to you about.  I believe he'll turn up about noon--as, I
understand, he did before, wanting, of course, to see Lady Riversreade.
I want you to tell the doorkeeper, Mitchell, to bring him straight in
when he comes, and Mitchell is not to say that Lady Riversreade is not
in--she won't be in--he's to admit him immediately; and you, if you
please, are to show him straight into the private office.  Instead of
finding Lady Riversreade there, he'll find--me.  Is that clear?'
'Perfectly clear, Major Penteney,' I replied.  'I'll see to it.'
'Well, there's something else,' he said.  'After I have had a little
plain-spoken talk with this fellow, I shall ring the bell.  I want you
to come in, and to bring Mitchell with you.  And--that's all, at
present.  You understand?'  'I understand, Major Penteney,' I answered.
'I'll see to it.  But as you've never seen this man there's one thing
I'd like to say to you--he's the sort of man who looks as if he might
be dangerous.'  He smiled at that.  'Thank you,' he said.  'I'm
prepared for that, Miss Featherstone.  You show him right in.'"

Rhona paused for a moment, to attend to the contents of her plate.  But
Hetherwick's knife and fork had become idle; so had Matherfield's; each
man, it was plain, was becoming absorbed.  And Matherfield suddenly
brightened, and gave Hetherwick an unmistakable wink.

"Good!--good!--good!" he muttered, with something like a chuckle.  "I'm
beginning to see a bit of daylight!  Excellent!--when you're ready,
Miss Featherstone----"

"Well," continued Rhona, after a few minutes' pause, "about noon, Dr.
Cyprian Baseverie drove up.  I had already given Mitchell his
instructions, and he brought Baseverie straight into my office.
Baseverie was evidently in the very best of spirits--he bowed and
grimaced at sight of me as if he expected to find me dying to see him.
I made no answer to his flowery greetings; I just got up, ushered him
to the door of the private room, and closed it after him as he stepped
across the threshold.  Then I laughed--he wouldn't see who was awaiting
him until he got right into the room, and I'd already gathered from
Major Penteney that his reception couldn't be exactly pleasant or
agreeable."

Matherfield rubbed his hands together.

"Good!--good!" he chuckled.  "Wish I'd been in that room!"

"It wasn't long before I was there, Mr. Matherfield," said Rhona.  "I
was, of course, tremendously curious to know what was going on there,
but the door fits closely, and I heard nothing--no angry voices or
anything.  However, in less than ten minutes the bell rang sharply.  I
called Mitchell--he's a big, strapping, very determined-looking
ex-Guardsman--and in we went.  I took everything in at a glance, Major
Penteney sat at Lady Riversreade's desk.  On the blotting-pad, his
right hand close to it, lay a revolver----"

"Hah!" exclaimed Matherfield.  "To be sure!  Just so!  Fine!"

"Opposite the desk stood Baseverie, staring first at Major Penteney,
then at us.  It's difficult for me to describe how he looked.  I think
the principal expression on his face was one of intense surprise."

"Surprise?" ejaculated Hetherwick.

"Surprise!  Astonishment!  He looked like a man who had just heard
something that he has believed it impossible to hear.  But there was
also such a look of anger and rage--well, if Major Penteney hadn't had
that revolver close to his finger-ends, and if Mitchell hadn't been
there, I should have screamed and run.  However, it was not I who was
to do the running.  As soon as Mitchell and I entered, Major Penteney
spoke--very quietly.  He nodded at Baseverie.  'Miss Featherstone and
you, Mitchell--you see this man?  If ever he comes here again, you,
Mitchell, will deny him entrance, and you, Miss Featherstone, on
hearing from Mitchell that he's here, will telephone for the police
and, if he hangs about, will give him in charge.'  Then he turned to
Baseverie.  'Now, my man!' he continued, pointing to the door.  'You
get out--quick!  Go!'  Of course, I looked at Baseverie.  He stood
staring almost incredulously at Major Penteney.  It seemed to me that
he could scarcely believe his ears--he gave me the impression of being
unable to credit that he could be so treated.  But he was also livid
with anger.  His fingers worked; his eyes blazed; it was dreadful to
see his lips.  He got out some words at last----'"

"Give me the exact ones, if you can," interrupted Matherfield.

"I can--I'm not likely to forget them," said Rhona.  "He
said--'What--you defy me, knowing what I know--knowing what I know!'"

"'Knowing what I know!'" muttered Matherfield.  "Knowing what he knew!
Um!--and then?"

"Then Major Penteney just pointed to the door.  'Get out, I tell you!'
he said.  'And look in the papers to-night.  Be off!'"

"'Look in the papers to-night,' eh?" said Matherfield.  "Um--um!  And
then, I suppose, he went?"

"He went without another word then," assented Rhona.  "Mitchell
escorted him out and saw him off.  Major Penteney looked at me when
he'd gone.  'There, Miss Featherstone,' he said, 'you've seen one of
the biggest scoundrels in London--or in Europe.  Let's hope you'll
never see him again, that that's the end of him here.  I think he's had
his lesson!'  I made no answer, but I was jolly glad to see Baseverie's
car scooting away down the drive!"

Matherfield picked up the tankard of ale at his side and took a hearty
pull at its contents.  He set the tankard down again with an emphatic
bang.

"I know what this job is!" he exclaimed triumphantly.  "Blackmail!"

"Just so!" agreed Hetherwick.  "I've been thinking that for the last
ten minutes.  Baseverie has been endeavouring to blackmail Lady
Riversreade.  But that's not our affair, you know.  What we're after is
the solving of the mystery surrounding Hannaford's death.  And--does
this look likely to fit in anywhere?"

"I should say it decidedly does look likely!" answered Matherfield.
"In my opinion it's all of a piece; at least, it's a piece out of a
piece, one of many pieces, like a puzzle.  The thing is to put these
pieces together.  And there are two things we can try to do at once.
First, find out more about this man Baseverie; the other, get hold of
more information about the lady in St. Mary's Mansions."

"What about approaching Lady Riversreade for information--or Major
Penteney?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Yes--why don't you?" said Rhona, almost eagerly.  "Do!  I'm a bit
tired of being there as Miss Featherstone.  I want to tell Lady
Riversreade the truth, and all the whys and wherefores of it."

But Matherfield shook his head.  The time for that was not yet, he
declared; let them wait awhile.  And after more conversation he and
Hetherwick returned to London.




CHAPTER XV

REVELATIONS

The late afternoon edition of the evening papers were just out when
Hetherwick and Matherfield reached Victoria.  Matherfield snatched one
up; a moment later he thrust it before Hetherwick, pointing to some big
black capitals.

"Good God!" he exclaimed.  "Look at that!"

Hetherwick looked, and gasped his astonishment at what he read.

  MURDER OF ROBERT HANNAFORD.
  FIVE THOUSAND POUNDS REWARD.


Hetherwick turned on his companion with a look that was both
questioning and surprised.

"This is probably--no, certainly!--what Penteney referred to when he
told Baseverie to look in the newspapers!" he said.  "That was
yesterday; it must have been in last night's papers, and this
morning's.  I saw neither."

"Wait!" said Matherfield.  He hurried back to the bookstall and
returned with an armful of papers, turning the topmost over as he came.
"It's here--and here!" he continued.  "Let's get a quiet corner
somewhere and look this thing carefully over!"

"Come into a waiting-room, then," said Hetherwick.  "Odd!" he muttered,
as they turned away.  "Who should offer a reward--like that, too!--who
isn't concerned in the case?"

"How do we know who isn't concerned in the case?" exclaimed
Matherfield.  "Somebody evidently is!--somebody who can not only afford
to offer five thousand pounds, but isn't afraid to spend no end in
advertising.  Look at that--and that--and that," he went on, turning
over his purchases rapidly.  "It's in every paper in London!"

"Let's read it carefully," said Hetherwick.  He spread out one of the
newspapers on the waiting-room table and muttered the wording of the
advertisement while Matherfield looked over his shoulder.  "Mysterious,
very!" he concluded.  "What's it mean?"

But Matherfield was re-reading the advertisement.


Whereas Robert Hannaford, formerly Superintendent of Police at
Sellithwaite, Yorkshire, died suddenly in an Underground Railway train,
near Charing Cross (Embankment) Station about 1.15 a.m. on March 19th
last, and expert medical investigation has proved that he was poisoned,
and there is evidence to warrant the belief that the poison was
administered by some person or persons with intent to cause his death,
this is to give notice that the above-mentioned sum of Five Thousand
Pounds will be paid to anyone first giving information which will lead
to the arrest and conviction of the person or persons concerned in
administering the said poison and that such information should be given
to the undersigned, who will pay the said reward in accordance with the
above-stated conditions.

PENTENEY, BLENKINSOP & PENTENEY,
  Solicitors.

April 22nd, 1920.
  853, Lincoln's Inn Fields,
    London, W.C.


Matherfield pointed to the names of the signatories.

"Penteney," he remarked.  "That's the name of the man Miss Hannaford
mentioned as having given Baseverie his dismissal."

"Of course--Major Penteney," said Hetherwick.  "Probably a junior
partner in the firm.  I know their names, but not much about them."

"I thought he was a soldier," said Matherfield.  "Major, she called
him."

"Very likely a Territorial officer," replied Hetherwick.  "Anyway, it's
very plain what this is, Matherfield, considering all we know.  This
advertisement has been issued on behalf of Lady Riversreade.  Penteney,
Blenkinsop & Penteney are no doubt her solicitors.  But--why?"

"Aye, why?" exclaimed Matherfield.  "That's just what beats me!  What
interest has she in Hannaford's murder?  Why should she want to bring
his murderer to justice?  If his granddaughter had offered, say, a
hundred pounds for information, I could understand it--she's his flesh
and blood.  But Lady Riversreade!  Why, if she's really the woman who
was once Mrs. Whittingham, you'd have thought she'd have been rather
glad that Hannaford was out of the way!  And, after all, this mayn't
come from her."

"I'm absolutely certain it does," asserted Hetherwick.  "Putting
everything together, what other conclusion can we come to?  It comes
from Lady Riversreade--and her adviser--Major Penteney, and it's
something to do with that man Baseverie.  But--what?"

"It ought to be looked into," muttered Matherfield.  "They've never
approached us on the matter.  It's a purely voluntary offer on their
part.  They've left the police clean out."

"Well, I make a suggestion," said Hetherwick.  "I think you and I had
better call at Penteney's to-morrow morning.  We can tell them
something--perhaps they'll tell us something.  Anyway, it's a foolish
thing to divide forces; we'd far better unite in a common effort."

"Um!" replied Matherfield doubtfully.  "But these lawyer chaps--they've
generally got something up their sleeves--some card that they want to
play at their own moment.  However, we can try 'em."

"Meet me at the south-east corner of Lincoln's Inn Fields at half-past
ten to-morrow morning," said Hetherwick.  "Penteney's offices are close
by.  We'll go together--and ask them straight out what this
advertisement means."

"All right--but if they won't tell?" suggested Matherfield.

"Then, in that case, we'll introduce Lady Riversreade's name, and ask
them if Lady Riversreade of Riversreade Court and Mrs. Whittingham,
formerly of Sellithwaite, are one and the same person," replied
Hetherwick.  "Come!  I think we can show them that we already know a
good deal."

"We have certainly a card or two to play," admitted Matherfield.  "All
right, Mr. Hetherwick!  To-morrow morning, then, as you suggest."

He was waiting at the appointed place when Hetherwick hurried up next
morning.  Hetherwick immediately turned him down the lower side of the
Fields.

"I've found out something about these people we're going to see," he
said.  "My clerk, Mapperley, told me a bit; he's a sort of walking
encyclopdia.  Old, highly respectable firm this.  Penteney, senior, is
retired; the firm is now really Blenkinsop & Penteney, junior.  And
Penteney, junior, is the Major Penteney who takes such an interest in
Lady Riversreade's Home--and in Lady Riversreade.  As I suggested last
night, he was a Territorial officer--so now he's back at his own job.
Now then, Matherfield, let's arrange our plan of campaign.  You, of
course, have your official credentials--I'm a deeply interested person,
the man who chanced to witness Hannaford's death.  I think you'd better
be spokesman."

"Well, you'll come in when wanted?" suggested Matherfield.  "You're
better used to lawyers than I am, being one yourself."

"I fear my acquaintance with solicitors is, so far, extremely limited,
Matherfield," replied Hetherwick with a laugh.  "I have seen a
brief!--but only occasionally.  However, here we are at 853, and a
solid and sombre old house it is."

The two callers had to wait for some time before any apparent notice
was taken of their cards by the persons to whom they had been sent in.
Matherfield was beginning to chafe when, at last, an elderly clerk
conducted them up to an inner room wherein one cold-eyed,
immobile-faced man sat at a desk, while another,, scarcely less stern
in appearance, in whom Hetherwick immediately recognised the Major
Penteney pointed out by Rhona, stood, hands in pockets, on the
hearthrug.  Each stared silently at the two callers; the man at the
desk pointed to chairs on either side of his fortress.  He looked at
Matherfield.

"Yes?" he asked.

"Mr. Blenkinsop, I presume?" began Matherfield, with a polite bow to
the desk.  "And Mr. Penteney?" with another to the hearthrug.

"Just so," agreed Blenkinsop.  "Precisely!  Yes?"

"You have my card, gentlemen, and so you know who I am," continued
Matherfield.  "The police----"

"A moment," interrupted Blenkinsop.  He picked up Hetherwick's card and
glanced from it to its presenter.  "Mr. Guy Hetherwick," he remarked.
"Does Mr. Hetherwick also call on behalf of the police?  Because," he
added, with a dry smile, "I think I've seen Mr. Hetherwick in wig and
gown."

"I am the man who was present at Robert Hannaford's death," said
Hetherwick.  "If you are conversant with the case----"

"Quite!--every detail!" said Blenkinsop.

"Then you know what I saw, and what evidence I gave at the inquest,"
continued Hetherwick.  "I have followed up the case ever since--and
that's why I am here."

"Not as _amicus curi_, then?" remarked Blenkinsop with a still dryer
smile.  "You're not a disinterested adviser.  I see!  And Mr.
Matherfield--why is he here?"

"I was saying, Mr. Blenkinsop, that the police have seen the
advertisement signed by your firm, offering five thousand pounds
reward--_etcetera_," answered Matherfield.  "Now, I have this Hannaford
case in hand, and I can assure you I've done a lot of work at it.  So,
in his way, has Mr. Hetherwick.  We're convinced that Hannaford was
murdered by poison, and that whoever poisoned him also poisoned the man
Granett at the same time.  Now, as either you or some person--a client,
I suppose--behind you is so much concerned in bringing Hannaford's
murderer to justice as to offer a big sum for necessary information, we
think you must know a great deal, and I suggest to you, gentlemen, that
you ought to place your knowledge at our disposal.  I hope my
suggestion is welcome, gentlemen."

Blenkinsop drummed the blotting-pad before him with the tips of his
fingers, and his face became more inscrutable than ever.  As for
Penteney, he maintained the same attitude which he had preserved ever
since the visitors entered the room, lounging against the mantelpiece,
hands in pockets, and his eyes alternately fixed on either Hetherwick
or Matherfield.  There was a brief silence; at last Blenkinsop spoke
abruptly.

"I don't think we have anything to say," he said.  "What we have to say
has been said already in the advertisement.  We shall pay the offered
reward to the person who gives satisfactory information.  I don't think
that interferes with the police work."

"That doesn't help me much, Mr. Blenkinsop," protested Matherfield.
"You, or your client, must know more than that!  There must be good
reasons why your client should offer such a big sum as reward.  I think
we ought to know--more."

"I am not prepared to tell you more," answered Blenkinsop.  "Except
that if we get the information which we think we shall get, we shall
not be slow to hand it over to the police authorities."

"That might be too late," urged Matherfield.  "This is an intricate
case--there are a good many wheels within wheels."  Then, interpreting
a glance which he had just received from Hetherwick as a signal to go
further, he added: "We know what a lot of wheels there are--no one
better!  For example, gentlemen, there is the curious fashion in which
this affair is mixed up with Lady Riversreade!"

In spite of their evidently habitual practice of self-control, the two
solicitors could not repress signs of astonishment.  Blenkinsop's face
fell; Penteney started out of his lounging attitude and stood upright.
And for the first time he spoke.

"What do you know about Lady Riversreade?" he demanded.

"A good deal, sir, but not so much as I intend to know," answered
Matherfield firmly.  "But I do know this--that Hannaford, just previous
to his sudden death, was in possession of a portrait of Lady
Riversreade, and believed her to be identical with a certain Mrs.
Whittingham who was through his hands on a charge of fraud, ten years
ago, at Sellithwaite, in Yorkshire.  I, too, believe that this Mrs.
Whittingham is now Lady Riversreade, and I may tell you that I'm in
full possession of all the facts relating to the Sellithwaite
affair--an affair of obtaining a diamond necklace, worth about four
thousand pounds, by means of a worthless cheque, and----"

Blenkinsop suddenly rose from his chair, holding up a hand.

"A moment, if you please!" he said.  "Penteney," he continued, turning
to his partner, "a word with you in your room."

Matherfield glanced triumphantly after the retreating pair, and laughed
when a door had closed on them.

"That's got 'em, Mr. Hetherwick!" he exclaimed.  "They see that we know
more than they reckoned for.  In some way or other, it strikes me, this
advertisement is a piece of bluff!"

"Bluff!" said Hetherwick.  "What do you mean?"

"What I say," answered Matherfield.  "Bluff!  Done to prevent somebody
from bringing up that old Sellithwaite affair.  Lay you a thousand to
one it is.  You'll see these two lawyers will be more communicative
when they come back.  Now they shall talk--and we'll listen!"

"If you have to do any more talking, Matherfield," said Hetherwick,
"keep Miss Hannaford's name out of it.  She's in a rather awkward
position.  She went there, of course, to find out what she could, and
the result's been that she's taken a fancy to Lady Riversreade, got a
genuine interest in the work there, and wants to stop.  Bit of a
bother, all that, and it'll need some straightening out.  Anyway, keep
her name out of it here."

"As I say, sir, when these chaps come back to us, they'll do the
talking!" answered Matherfield, with a chuckle.  "You'll see!  If you
want to keep Miss Hannaford's name out, so do they want to keep Lady
Riversreade's name out--I know the signs!"

Blenkinsop and Penteney suddenly came back and seated themselves,
Blenkinsop at his desk and Penteney close by.  And Blenkinsop
immediately turned to his callers.  His manner had changed; he looked
now like a man who is anxious to get a settlement of a difficult
question.

"We have decided to talk freely to you," he said at once.  "That means,
to tell you everything we know about this matter.  You, Mr.
Matherfield, as representing the police, will, of course, treat our
communication confidentially.  I needn't ask you, Mr. Hetherwick, to
regard all that's said here, as--you know!  Now, to begin with--just
get one fact, an absolutely irrefutable fact, into your minds at once.
Lady Riversreade is not the woman who was known as Mrs. Whittingham at
Sellithwaite ten years ago, nor did Hannaford believe that she was
either!"

"What?" exclaimed Matherfield.  "But----" he turned to Hetherwick.
"You hear that?" he went on.  "Why, we know----"

"Let Mr. Blenkinsop go on," said Hetherwick quietly.  "He's explaining,
I think."

"Just so," agreed Blenkinsop.  "And I'm beginning by endeavouring to
clear away a few mistaken ideas from your minds.  Lady Riversreade is
not Mrs. Whittingham.  Hannaford did not think she was Mrs.
Whittingham.  It was not Lady Riversreade's portrait that Hannaford cut
out of the paper."

Hetherwick could not repress a start at that.

"Whose was it, then?" he demanded.  "For I certainly believed it was!"

Blenkinsop stooped and drew out a drawer from his desk.  From a bundle
of documents he produced a newspaper, carefully folded and labelled.
Opening this, he laid it before the two visitors, pointing to a picture
marked with blue pencil.  And Hetherwick at once saw that here was a
duplicate of the portrait in his own pocket-book.  But there was this
important difference--while Hannaford had cut away the lettering under
his picture, it was there in the one which Blenkinsop exhibited.  He
started again as he read it--_Madame Anita Listorelle_.

"That's the picture which Hannaford cut out of the paper," said
Blenkinsop.  "It is not that of Lady Riversreade."

"Then it's that of a woman who's her double!" exclaimed Matherfield.
"I'll lay anything that if you asked a hundred men who've seen Lady
Riversreade if that's her picture, they'd swear it is!"

"I see," said Hetherwick, disregarding his companion's outburst, "that
this purports to be a portrait of a Madame Listorelle, who is described
in the accompanying letterpress as a famous connoisseur of precious
stones.  Now, in relation to what we're discussing, may I ask a plain
question?  Who is Madame Listorelle?"

Blenkinsop smiled--oracularly.

"Madame Listorelle," he replied, "is the twin sister of Lady
Riversreade!"




CHAPTER XVI

STILL MORE

Blenkinsop's sudden announcement, not altogether unexpected by
Hetherwick as a result of the last few minutes' proceedings, seemed to
strike Matherfield with all the force of a lightning-like illumination.
His mouth opened; his eyes widened; he turned on Hetherwick as if,
having been lost for a while in a baffling maze, he had suddenly seen a
way pointed out to him.

"Oh, that's it, is it?" he exclaimed.  "A twin sister, eh?  Then--but
go on, Mr. Blenkinsop; I'm beginning to see things."

"The matter is doubtless puzzling--to outsiders," responded Blenkinsop.
"To clear it up, I shall have to go into some family history.  Lady
Riversreade and Madame Listorelle are, I repeat, twin sisters.  They
are the daughters of a man who in his time was captain of various
merchant ships--the old sailing ships--and who knocked about the world
a good deal.  He married an American woman, and his two daughters were
born in Galveston, Texas.  They were educated in America--but there's
no need to go into the particulars of their early lives----"

"There's a certain particular that I should like to have some
information about, if you please," interrupted Hetherwick.  "The Mrs.
Whittingham who was at Sellithwaite ten years ago had the figure of a
snake tattooed round a wrist, in various colours.  She wore a black
velvet band to cover it.  Now----"

Blenkinsop turned to his partner with a smile.

"I thought that would come up," he said.  "Well Mr. Hetherwick, if you
want to know about that matter, both sisters are tattooed in the same
fashion.  That was a bit of work of the old sea-dog, their father--a
fancy, and a very foolish one, of his.  He had the children tattooed in
that way when they were quite young, much to their disgust when they
grew older.  Each lady wears a covering velvet armlet--as I know."

"Proceed, if you please," said Hetherwick.  "That's cleared up!"

"I gather that you've been making inquiries on your own account,"
observed Blenkinsop.  "Well, since we're determined to tell you
everything, we'll be as good as our word.  So let's come to the
Sellithwaite affair.  You've probably heard only one version--you may
have got it from Hannaford; you may have got it from old newspapers;
you may have got it on the spot--it's immaterial to us.  But you
haven't heard the version of the lady who was then Mrs. Whittingham.
That puts a rather different complexion on things.  For reasons of her
own, with which we've nothing to do, Mrs. Whittingham--her proper and
legal name at that time--stayed at Sellithwaite for a while.  She had
various transactions with a jeweller there; eventually she bought from
him a diamond necklace at a price--three thousand nine hundred pounds.
She gave him a cheque for the amount, fully expecting that by the time
it reached her bankers in Manchester certain funds for her credit would
have reached them from America.  There was a hitch--the funds didn't
arrive--the cheque was returned.  The jeweller approached the
police--Hannaford, their superintendent there, got out a warrant and
tracked down Mrs. Whittingham.  He arrested her, and she got away from
him, left England, and returned to America.  For some time she was in
financial straits.  But she did not forget her liabilities, and
eventually she sent the Sellithwaite jeweller the agreed price of the
diamond necklace, and eight years' interest at five per cent. on the
amount.  She holds his formal receipt for the money she sent him.  So
much for that episode--whether Hannaford ever knew of the payment or
not, I don't know.  We are rather inclined to believe that he didn't.
But--the necklace was paid for, and paid for handsomely."

"I may as well say that I'm aware of that," remarked Hetherwick.  "I
have been informed of the fact at first hand."

"Very good.  I see you have been at Sellithwaite," said Blenkinsop with
another of his shrewd smiles.  "Now then, we come to what is far more
pertinent--recent events.  The situation as regards Lady Riversreade
and Madame Listorelle some little time ago--say, when Hannaford came to
town--was this: Lady Riversreade, widow of Sir John Riversreade, had
inherited his considerable fortune, was settled at Riversreade Court in
Surrey, and had founded a Home for wounded officers close by, of which
my friend and partner, Major Penteney there, is London representative.
Her sister, Madame Listorelle, had a flat at Paddington and another in
New York.  She was chiefly in New York, but she was sometimes in London
and sometimes in Paris.  As a matter of fact, Madame Listorelle is an
expert in precious stones, and a dealer in them.  But she has recently
become engaged to be married to a well-known peer, an elderly, very
wealthy man--which possibly has a good deal to do with what I am going
to tell you."

"Probably, I think, Blenkinsop--not possibly," suggested Penteney.
"Probably!--decidedly."

"Probably, then--probably!" assented Blenkinsop.  He leaned forward
across his desk towards the two listeners.  "Now, gentlemen, your
closest attention, for I'm coming to the really important points of
this matter--those that affect the police particularly.  About a
fortnight ago Lady Riversreade, being in her private office at her
home, close by Riversreade Court, was waited upon by a man who sent in
a card bearing the name of Dr. Cyprian Baseverie.  Lady Riversreade
thought that the presenter of this card was some medical man who wished
to inspect the Home, and he was admitted to see her.  She soon found
out that he had come on no such errand as she had imagined.  He told
her a strange tale.  He let her know, to begin with, that he was fully
conversant with that episode in her sister's life which related to
Sellithwaite and the diamond necklace.  Lady Riversreade, who knew all
about it, felt that the man's information had been gained at first
hand.  He also let her know that Madame Listorelle's whereabouts and
engagement were familiar to him; in short, he showed that he was well
up in the present family history, both as regards Lady Riversreade and
her sister.  Then he let his hand be seen more plainly.  He told Lady
Riversreade that a certain gang of men in London had become acquainted
with the facts of the Sellithwaite matter, the warrant, the arrest, the
escape, and that they were also aware of Madame Listorelle's engagement
to Lord--we will leave his name out at present, or refer to him as Lord
X--and that they wanted a price for their silence.  In other words,
they were determined on blackmail.  If they were not paid their price,
they were going to Lord X, with all the facts, to tell him that he was
engaged to a woman who, as they would put it, was still liable by the
law of the land to arrest and prosecution for fraud."

"Isn't she?" asked Matherfield suddenly.  "No time-limit in these sort
of cases, I think, Mr. Blenkinsop.  Liable ten or twenty or thirty
years after--I think!"

"I've already said that the Sellithwaite affair was one of account,"
replied Blenkinsop.  "There was no intent to defraud, and the full
amount and interest on it was duly paid.  But that's not the
point--we're dealing with the presentment of this to Lady Riversreade
by the man Baseverie.  Of course, Lady Riversreade didn't know how the
law might be, and she was alarmed on her sister's account.  She asked
Baseverie what he wanted.  He told her plainly then that he could
settle these men--if she would find the money.  He had, he said, a
certain hold over them which he could use to advantage.  Lady
Riversreade wanted to know what that hold was; he wouldn't tell her.
She then wanted to know how much the men wanted; he wouldn't say.  What
he did say was that if she would be prepared to find the money to
silence them, he, during the next week, would exert pressure on them to
accept a reasonable amount, and would call on her on the following
Friday and tell her what they would take.  She made that appointment
with him."

"And, I hope, took advice in the meantime," muttered Matherfield.
"Ought to have handed him over there and then!"

"No--she took no advice in the meantime," continued Blenkinsop.
"Madame Listorelle was in Paris--Major Penteney was away on business in
the country.  Lady Riversreade awaited Baseverie's next coming.  When
he came he told her what his gang wanted--thirty thousand pounds.  He
specified, too, the way in which it was to be paid--in a fashion which
would have prevented the payment being traced to the people who
received it.  But now Lady Riversreade was more prepared--she had had
time to think.  She expected Major Penteney next day; she also knew
that her sister would return from Paris on the following Monday.  So
she told Baseverie that she would give him an answer on Monday evening
if he would make an appointment to meet her at some place in London.
Eventually they made an appointment at Vivian's, in Candlestick
Passage.  Baseverie went away; next day Lady Riversreade told Major
Penteney all that had happened.  As a result, he went with her to
Vivian's on Monday evening.  They waited an hour beyond the fixed time.
Baseverie made no appearance----"

"Just so!" muttered Matherfield.  "He wouldn't--the Major being there!"

"Perhaps," assented Blenkinsop.  "Anyway, he didn't materialise.  So
Lady Riversreade went away, leaving Major Penteney behind her.  I may
say that he stopped there for some further time, keeping a sharp
look-out for the man whom Lady Riversreade had described in detail--a
remarkable man in appearance, I understand.  But he never saw him."

"No!" exclaimed Matherfield cynically.  "Of course he didn't!  But she
would ha' done--if she'd gone alone!"

"Well, there it was," continued Blenkinsop.  "Now for Lady Riversreade.
She drove to her sister's flat in Paddington, and found Madame
Listorelle just returned from Paris.  She told her all that had
happened.  Madame Listorelle determined to go to New York at once and
get certain papers from her flat there which would definitely establish
her absolute innocence in the Sellithwaite affair.  Leaving Lady
Riversreade in the flat, Madame Listorelle set off for Southampton
before five o'clock next morning--yes?"

Matherfield, uttering a deep groan, smote his forehead.

"Aye!" he muttered.  "Just so!  To be sure!  But go on!--go on, sir."

"You seem to be highly surprised," said Blenkinsop.  "However--at
Southampton she booked a passage in a name she always used when
travelling--her maiden name--by the _Tartaric_, sailing that afternoon.
That done, she went to a hotel for lunch.  Then she began to think
things over more calmly.  And in the end, instead of sailing for New
York, she went back, cancelled her booking, and set off by train to
Lord X's country seat in Wiltshire, and told him the whole story.  She
wired to her sister as to what she had done, and in the evening wrote
to her.  Meanwhile, Lady Riversreade had returned, early in the
morning, to Riversreade Court.  Major Penteney went with her.  He was
confident that Baseverie would turn up.  He did turn up!  But he did
not see Lady Riversreade.  He saw Major Penteney--alone.  And Major
Penteney, after a little plain talk to him, metaphorically kicked him
out, and told him to do his worst.  He went--warned that if ever he
showed himself there again he would be handed over to the police."

Matherfield groaned again, but the reason of his distress was obviously
of a different nature.

"A mistake, sir--a great mistake!" he exclaimed, shaking his head at
Penteney.  "You shouldn't have let that fellow go like that!  You
should have handed him over there and then.  Go?  You don't know where
he may be!"

"Oh, well, we're not quite such fools as we seem, Matherfield," he
replied.  "When I went down to Dorking with Lady Riversreade on Tuesday
morning I had with me a smart man whom I can trust.  He saw Baseverie
arrive; he saw Baseverie leave.  I think we shall be able to put our
fingers on Baseverie at any moment.  Our man won't lose sight of him!"

"Oh, well, that's better, sir, that's much better!" said Matherfield.
"That's all right!  A chap like that should be watched night and day.
But now, gentlemen, about this reward!  Your notion of offering it
sprang, of course, from this Baseverie business.  But--how, exactly?
Did he mention Hannaford to Lady Riversreade?"

"No!" replied Blenkinsop.  "I'll tell you how we came to issue the
advertisement.  All Sunday afternoon and evening, and for some time on
Monday morning, Lady Riversreade, Major Penteney, and myself were in
close consultation about this affair.  I'll tell you at once how and
why we connected it with the poisoning of Hannaford, of which, of
course, all of us had read in the newspapers."

"Aye!--how, now?" asked Matherfield.

"Because of this," answered Blenkinsop.  He tapped his desk to
emphasise his words, watching Matherfield keenly as he spoke.  "Because
of this: Baseverie told Lady Riversreade that the gang of blackmailers
had in their possession the original warrant for Mrs. Whittingham's
arrest!"

Hetherwick felt himself impelled to jump in his chair, to exclaim
loudly.  He repressed the inclination, but Matherfield was less
reserved.

"Ah!" he exclaimed sharply.  "Ah!"

"Baseverie made a false step there," continued Blenkinsop.  "He should
never have told that.  But he did--no doubt he thought a rich woman
easy prey.  Now, of course, when we came to consult, we knew all about
the Sellithwaite affair; we knew, too, that Hannaford was
superintendent at the time and that he had the warrant; it was not at
all improbable that he had preserved it in his pocket-book, and had it
on him when he came to London.  What, then, was the obvious
conclusion--that the men who now held that warrant had got it, probably
by foul means, from Hannaford, and were concerned in his murder?
And--more than that--did the gang of which Baseverie spoke really
exist?  Wasn't it likely that the gang was--Baseverie?"

"Aye!" muttered Matherfield.  "I've been thinking of that!"

"Yet," said Blenkinsop, "it was on the cards that there might be a
gang.  We searched all the newspapers' accounts thoroughly.  We found
that next to no information could be got as to Hannaford's movements
between the time of his arrival in London and the night of his death.
The one man who might have given more information about Hannaford's
doings on the evening preceding his death--Granett--was dead, evidently
poisoned, as Hannaford was poisoned.  These were circumstances--they've
probably occurred to both of you--which led us to believe that
Hannaford had formed the acquaintance of folk here in town who were of
a shady sort.  And one thing was absolutely certain--if the gang, or if
Baseverie, had really got that warrant, they had got it from Hannaford!
Eh?"

"That may be taken as certain," assented Hetherwick.  "Either directly
or indirectly, it must have been from him."

"We think they, or he, got it directly from him," said Blenkinsop.
"Our theory is that if there is a gang Baseverie is an active, perhaps
the leading, member; that Hannaford was previously acquainted with him
or some other member; that Hannaford was with him or them on the
evening preceding his death; that he jokingly told them that he had
discovered the identity of Madame Listorelle with Mrs. Whittingham; and
that they poisoned him--and Granett, as being present--in order to keep
the secret to themselves and to blackmail Madame Listorelle and her
sister, Lady Riversreade.  That's our general idea--and that's why, on
Monday noon, we issued the advertisement.  We meant to keep things to
ourselves at first, and if substantial evidence came, to pass it over
to the police.  Now you know everything.  It may be, if there is a
gang, that one member will turn traitor for the sake of five thousand
pounds and if he can exculpate himself satisfactorily; it may be, too,
that matters will develop until we're in a position to fasten things on
Baseverie----"

"I still wish that either Lady Riversreade or Major Penteney had handed
him over to custody!" said Matherfield.  "You see----"

"You've got to remember that Baseverie never demanded anything for
himself," interrupted Penteney.  "He represented himself as a
go-between.  But our man's safe enough--a retired detective, and----"

Just then a clerk opened the door and entered with a telegram.
Blenkinsop tore open the envelope, glanced hurriedly at the message and
flung the form on his desk with an exclamation of annoyance.

"This is from our man!" he said.  "Sent from Dover.  Followed Baseverie
down there--and Baseverie's slipped him!"




CHAPTER XVII

THE TORN LABELS

Penteney strode forward and picked up the telegram; a moment later he
passed it over to Hetherwick.

"That's most unfortunate!" he exclaimed.  "And unexpected, too!  Of
course, the fellow's slipped off to the Continent."

Matherfield looked over Hetherwick's shoulder and read the message.


"_Followed him down here last night.  Put up at same hotel, but he
slipped me and got clear away early this morning.  Returning now._"


"You should have employed two men, gentlemen," said Matherfield.
"One's not enough--in a case of that sort.  But it's as I said
before--this man should have been given into custody at once.
However----"

He got up from his chair, as if there was no more to be said, and moved
towards the door.  But half-way across the room he paused.

"You'll let me know if anybody comes forward about that reward?" he
suggested.  "It's more of a police matter, you know."

The two partners, who were obviously much annoyed by the telegram,
nodded.

"We shall let you know--at once," answered Blenkinsop.  "Of course,
you'll regard all we've told you as strictly confidential?"

"Oh, to be sure, sir," replied Matherfield.  "It's not the only private
and confidential feature of this affair, I assure you."

Outside he turned to Hetherwick.

"Well!" he said.  "We've cleared up a few things, Mr. Hetherwick--or,
rather, those two have cleared them up for us.  But are we any nearer
answering the question that we want answering--who poisoned Robert
Hannaford?"

"I think we are!" replied Hetherwick.  "I am, anyhow!  Either Baseverie
poisoned him--or he knows who did!"

"Knows who did!" repeated Matherfield.  "Ah!--that's more like it.  I
don't think he did it--he wouldn't be so ready about showing himself
forward."

"I'm not so sure of that," remarked Hetherwick.  "From what we've heard
of him, he seems to be a bold and daring sort of scamp.  Probably he
thought he'd have a very easy prey in Lady Riversreade; probably, too,
he believed that a woman who's got all that money would make little to
do about parting with thirty thousand pounds.  One thing's sure,
however--Baseverie knows what we want to know.  And--he's gone!"

"Perhaps--perhaps!" said Matherfield.  "And perhaps not.  This man of
Penteney's no doubt tracked him to Dover, and there he lost him, but
that isn't saying that Baseverie's gone on the Continent.  If
Baseverie's the cute customer that he seems to be, he'd put two and two
together when Major Penteney warned him off Riversreade Court.  He'd
probably suspect Penteney of setting a watch on him; he may have
spotted the very man who was watching.  Then, if he'd any sense, he'd
lead that man a bit of a dance, and eventually double on him.  No!--I
should say Baseverie's back here in town!  That's about it, Mr.
Hetherwick.  But what's this?  Here's one of my men coming to meet us.
I left word where I should be found."

Hetherwick looked up and saw a man, who was obviously a policeman in
plain clothes, coming towards them.  He was a quiet-looking,
stodgy-faced man, but he had news written all over his plain face.

"Well, Marler?" inquired Matherfield as they met.  "Got something?"

There was nobody about in that quiet corner of Lincoln's Inn Fields,
yet the man looked round as if anxious to escape observation, and he
spoke in a whisper.

"I believe I've got that chemist!" he answered.  "Leastways, it's like
this.  There's a chemist I tried this morning--name of Macpherson, in
Maiden Lane.  I showed him the facsimiles of the lost labels on the
medicine bottles, and asked him if he could give me any information.
He's a very cautious sort of man, I think; he examined the facsimiles a
long time, saying nothing.  Then he said he supposed I was a policeman,
and so on, and of course I had to tell him a bit--only a bit.  Then he
said, all of a sudden, 'Look here, my friend,' he said, 'you'd better
tell me, straight out--has this to do with that Hannaford poisoning
case?'  So, of course, I said that, between ourselves, it had.  'Isn't
Matherfield in charge of that?' he said.  Of course, I said you were.
'Very well' he said.  'You send Matherfield to me.  I'm not going to
say anything to you,' he said.  'What I've got to say I'll say to
Matherfield.'  So I went back to head-quarters, and they told me you'd
gone to Lincoln's Inn Fields."

"All right, my lad!" said Matherfield.  "If you've found the right man,
I'll remember you.  What's his name--Macpherson, Maiden Lane?  Very
good--then I'll just step along and see him.  Not a word to anybody,
Marler!" he added, as the man turned away.  "Keep close.  Now, this is
a bit of all right, Mr. Hetherwick!" he continued, chuckling and
rubbing his hands.  "This beats all we heard at Penteney's!  Only let
me get the name and address of the man for whom that bottle of medicine
was made up, and I think I shall have taken a long stride!  But come
along--we'll see the chemist together."

The shop in Maiden Lane before which they presently paused was a small,
narrow-fronted, old-fashioned establishment, with little in its windows
beyond the usual coloured bottles and over the front no more than the
name "Macpherson" in faded gilt letters on a time-stained signboard.
It was dark and stuffy within the shop, and Hetherwick had to strain
his eyes to see a tall, thin, elderly, spectacled man, very precise and
trim in appearance, who stood behind the single counter, silently
regarding him and Matherfield.

"Mr. Macpherson?" inquired Matherfield.  "Just so!  Good morning, sir.
My name is Matherfield--Inspector Matherfield.  One of my men tells
me----"

"One moment!" interrupted the chemist.  He stepped behind a screen at
the rear of his shop and presently returned with a young man, to whom
he whispered a word or two.  Then he beckoned to his two visitors, and
opening a door at the further corner, ushered them into a private
parlour.  "We shall be to ourselves here, Mr. Matherfield," he said.
"And I've no doubt your business is of a highly confidential nature."

"Something of that sort, Mr. Macpherson," assented Matherfield, as he
and Hetherwick took chairs at a centre table.  "But my man'll have
prepared you a bit, no doubt.  He tells me he showed you the
photographed facsimiles of certain torn labels that are on a medicine
bottle which figures in the Hannaford case, and that in consequence of
your seeing them you asked to see me.  Well, sir, here I am!"

"Aye, just so, Mr. Matherfield, just so, precisely," replied the
chemist, turning up the gas-jet which hung above the table.  "Aye, to
be sure!"  He, too, sat down at the table, and folded his thin long
fingers together.  "Aye, and you'll be thinking, Mr. Matherfield, that
yon bottle has something to do with the poisoning of Hannaford?"

"I'll be candid with you, Mr. Macpherson," answered Matherfield.  "But
first let me ask you something.  Have you read the newspaper accounts
of this affair?"

"I've done that, Mr. Matherfield--yes, all I could lay hands on."

"Then you'll be aware that there was another man poisoned as well as
Hannaford--a man named Granett, who was in Hannaford's company on the
night when it all happened?  This gentleman here is the one that was in
the Underground train and saw Hannaford die, and Granett make off, as
he said, to fetch a doctor."

"That'll be Mr. Hetherwick, I'm thinking," said the chemist, with a
polite bow.  "Aye, just so!"

"I see you've read the reports of the inquest," remarked Matherfield,
with a smile.  "Very well, as I say, Granett was found dead later.  I
discovered a medicine bottle and a glass at his bedside.  There'd been
whisky in both, but according to the medical experts there had also
been poison--the traces, they say, were indisputable.  Now, on that
medicine bottle were two torn labels--on the upper one, as you see from
the facsimile photograph, there's been a name written--all that's left
is the initial C. and the first letter of a surname, A.  All the rest's
gone.  And what I want to know is--are you the chemist that made up the
medicine or the tonic, or whatever it was, that was in that bottle,
and, if so, who is the customer for whom you made it, and whose
Christian name begins with C. and surname with A.?  Do you comprehend
me?"

"Aye, aye, Mr. Matherfield!" answered the chemist eagerly.  "I'm
appreciating every word you're saying, and very lucid it all is.  And
I'm willing to give you all the information in my power, but first I'd
just like to have a bit myself on a highly pertinent matter.  Now,
you'll be aware, Mr. Matherfield, if you've seen the newspapers of this
last day or two, that there's a firm of solicitors in Lincoln's Inn
Fields that's offering a reward of five thousand pounds----"

"I'm well enough aware of it, Mr. Macpherson," interrupted Matherfield
with a laugh and a sly glance at Hetherwick.  "Mr. Hetherwick and
myself have just come straight from their office, and what you want to
know is--if you give me information will it be the same thing as giving
it to them?  You want to make sure about the reward?"

"Precisely, Mr. Matherfield, precisely!" assented the chemist eagerly.
"You've hit my meaning exactly.  For, of course, when there's a reward
like yon----"

"If you give us information, Mr. Macpherson, that'll lead to the arrest
and conviction of the guilty party, you can rest assured you'll get
that reward," said Matherfield.  "And Mr. Hetherwick'll support me in
that, I'm sure."

"I'm satisfied--I'm satisfied, gentlemen!" exclaimed Macpherson, as
Hetherwick murmured his confirmation.  "Well, it's a strange, black
business, and I'd no idea that I would come to be associated with it
until that man of yours called in this morning, Mr. Matherfield.  But
then I knew!  And I'll shorten matters by telling you, at once--I made
up the tonic that was in that bottle!"

Matherfield rubbed his hands.

"Good!" he said quietly.  "Good!  And now, then--the critical question!
For whom?"

"For a Dr. Charles Ambrose, from a prescription of his own," replied
Macpherson.  "It's a sort of pick-me-up tonic.  I first made it up for
him two years ago; I've made it up for him several times since.  The
last occasion was about six weeks ago.  I have all the dates, though,
in my books; I can show you them."

"Wait a bit," said Matherfield.  "That's of no great importance--yet.
Dr. Charles Ambrose, eh?  Have you his address?"

"Aye, to be sure!" answered the chemist.  "His address is 38, Number
59, John Street."

"Adelphi!" suggested Matherfield.

"Adelphi, precisely--38, Number 59, John Street, Adelphi," repeated
Macpherson.  "That's in the books, too."

Matherfield suddenly became silent, staring at the floor.  When he
looked up again it was at Hetherwick.

"Didn't Granett exclaim that he knew of a doctor, close by, when he
rushed out of that train at Charing Cross Underground?" he asked.
"Gave the impression that he knew of one close by, anyway?"

"He said distinctly close by," answered Hetherwick.  "Why, are you
thinking----"

Matherfield interrupted him with a wave of the hand, and turned again
to the chemist.  "You've seen this Dr. Charles Ambrose?" he asked
abruptly.

"Oh, I have, Mr. Matherfield, many a time and often," replied
Macpherson.  "But now I come to think of it, not lately."

"When--last?" demanded Matherfield.

"I should think last when he called in and told me to make him another
bottle of his tonic," answered Macpherson, after some thought.  "As I
said just now, perhaps about six weeks ago.  But the books----"

"Never mind the books yet.  What's this Dr. Charles Ambrose like?"

"A tall, handsome man, distinguished-looking--I should say about forty
years of age.  A dark man--hair, eyes, beard.  He wears his moustache
and beard in--well, a sort of foreign fashion; in fact, he's more like
a Spaniard than an Englishman."

"But--is he an Englishman?"

"He was always taken by me for an Englishman; he speaks like one--that
is, like an Englishman of the upper classes.  He once told me he was an
Oxford man--we'd been talking about universities."

"Well-dressed man?"

"Aye, he was that!  A smart, fine man."

"Did you ever see him in a big, dark overcoat, with a large white silk
muffler about his neck and the lower part of his face?"

"Aye, I've seen him like that!  On chilly evenings.  Indeed, that's
another thing he told me--he was subject to bronchial attacks."

"Muffled himself well up, eh?" suggested Matherfield.

"Aye, just so!  He's been in here like that."

Matherfield turned to Hetherwick with a significant glance.

"That's the man who met Hannaford at Victoria Station that night!--the
man that Ledbitter saw, and that nobody's seen since!" he exclaimed.
"A million to one on it!  Now then, who is he?"

"You know his name and his address," remarked Hetherwick.

"Yes--and I know, too, that Mr. Macpherson here hasn't seen him
lately!" retorted Matherfield dryly.  "How often, now, Mr. Macpherson,
did you use to see him?  I mean, did you use to see him at other times
than when he came into your shop?"

"Oh, yes!  I've seen him in the street, outside," replied the chemist.
"I've seen him, too, going in and out of Rule's, and in and out of
Romano's."

"In other words," remarked Matherfield, "he was pretty well known about
this end of the Strand.  I'm not sure, now, that I don't remember such
a man myself--black, silky, carefully-trimmed beard, always a big
swell.  But--Mr. Macpherson hasn't seen him lately!  Hm!  Do you know
if he was in practice, Mr. Macpherson?"

"I could not say as to that, Mr. Matherfield.  Seeing that he called
himself Dr. Ambrose, I supposed he was a medical practitioner, but I
don't know what his degrees or qualifications were at all."

Matherfield glanced at a row of books which stood over a desk at the
side of the parlour.

"Have you got an up-to-date medical directory?" he asked.  "Good!
Let's look the man up.  You turn up his name, Mr. Hetherwick," he went
on as the chemist handed down a volume; "you're more used to books than
I am.  Find out if there's anything about him."

Hetherwick turned over the pages of the directory, and presently shook
his head.

"There's no Charles Ambrose here," he said.  "Look for yourselves."

Matherfield glanced at the place indicated and said nothing.
Macpherson made an exclamation of surprise.

"Aye, well, he may be a foreigner, after all," he observed.  "But I
shouldn't have considered him one, and he certainly told me he was an
Oxford graduate."

"Foreigner or Oxforder, I'm going to know more about him!" declared
Matherfield, rising and grasping his stick with an air of
determination.  "Well, Mr. Macpherson, we're obliged to you, and if
this results in anything--you know!  But for the moment--a bit of that
caution that you Scotsmen are famous for--eh?"

Outside, Matherfield laid his hand on Hetherwick's elbow.

"Mr. Hetherwick," he said solemnly, "we're on the track--at last!  Sure
as my name's Matherfield, we've hit the trail!  Now we're going to John
Street, Adelphi--and I'll lay you anything you like that the man's
vanished!"




CHAPTER XVIII

THE TELEGRAM

Hetherwick followed his companion across the Strand, into the Adelphi,
and to the house they wanted--an old Adams mansion, now divided into
flats.  Matherfield did not take the trouble to ascend to the upper
regions; he sought and found a caretaker and put a question to him.
The man shook his head.

"Dr. Ambrose, sir?" he replied.  "Oh, yes, Dr. Ambrose lives here--38.
But he ain't in, sir--ain't at home, in fact.  He's been away three
weeks or so--don't know where he is."

With a meaning look at Hetherwick, Matherfield drew the caretaker aside
and talked to him for a few moments; the man presently turned and went
downstairs to the basement from which they had summoned him.

"That's all right," remarked Matherfield, with a wink.  "He's going to
let us into Ambrose's flat.  Didn't I tell you we shouldn't find
Ambrose here?  Not he!  I should say he's off!"

"Supposing he returns--while we're here?" asked Hetherwick.

"Wish he would!" chuckled Matherfield.  "Nobody I want to see more!  If
he did, why, I should just ask him to take a little walk with me--to
explain a few matters.  But he won't!  Here's the man.  We'll go up."

The caretaker reappeared with a bunch of keys and led the way to a flat
at the top of the old house.  He unlocked a door and stood aside.

"You needn't wait," said Matherfield.  "I'll shut the place up again
when we leave and let you know.  All right."

He walked in, with Hetherwick at his heels, as soon as the caretaker
had gone, and, once inside, closed the door carefully upon himself and
his companion.  But Hetherwick, after a first glance at the
sitting-room into which they had entered, a somewhat untidy, shabbily
furnished place, went straight to the hearth and pointed to a framed
photograph, time-stained and faded, which hung over the mantelpiece.

"There's a striking and significant piece of evidence--at once!" he
exclaimed.  "Do you know what that is, Matherfield?"

Matherfield looked in the direction indicated, and shook his head.

"Not the slightest idea!" he answered.  "I see it's a photograph of
some old church or other--that's all."

"That's the famous Parish Church of Sellithwaite!" said Hetherwick.
"One of the very finest in England!  I had a look at it--only a mere
look--when I was down there.  Now then, what's this man doing with a
picture of Sellithwaite Parish Church in his rooms?  Hannaford came
from Sellithwaite!"

"That's a mighty significant thing, anyway," agreed Matherfield.
"We're getting at something this morning!" He looked more carefully at
the photograph.  "Grand old building, as you say," he continued.  "Of
course, the mere fact of his having it put up there shows that he's
some interest in it.  Sellithwaite man, likely.  But we'll find all
that out.  Now let's look round."

There was little to see, Hetherwick thought.  The flat consisted of a
sitting-room and bedroom and a small bathroom.  The furniture was
plain, old, rather shabby; the whole place suggested that its occupant
was not over well-to-do; the only signs of affluence to be seen were
manifested in the toilet articles on the dressing-table, in a
luxurious, if well-worn, dressing-gown which hung on the rail of the
bed, and in the presence of carefully folded and pressed garments laid
out in the bedroom.  There were a few books, chiefly medical treatises,
in shelves in the sitting-room; a few personal pictures, mainly of
college and school groups, on the walls; and a desk in the centre,
littered with more books, writing materials, and papers.  Matherfield
began to turn them over.

"See that?" he exclaimed suddenly, pointing to a movable calendar which
stood on the top ledge of the desk.  "Notice the date?  March 18th!
That's the day on which Hannaford got his quietus.  At least, strictly
speaking, it was the day before.  Hannaford actually died on the
nineteenth--about--what was it?--very early in the morning, anyway.
What's one to gather from this?--that Ambrose hasn't been here since
the eighteenth.  So--hallo!"

Turning over the loose papers that lay about the blotting-pad, he had
suddenly lighted upon a telegram; just as suddenly he thrust it into
Hetherwick's hands.

"Look at that!" he exclaimed.  "Now, that is a find!  Biggest we've
ever had--so far!"

Hetherwick read the apparently innocent message.


"_All right.  Will meet you Victoria bookstall this evening as
suggested._

"_Hannaford._"


"See the date?" said Matherfield excitedly.  "March 18th!  Now we've
got at it!  Ambrose was the man that met Hannaford at Victoria, the
tall, muffled-up man that Ledbitter saw!  That's--certain!"

"Seems so," agreed Hetherwick.  He was still studying the telegram.
"Sent off from Fleet Street twelve-fifteen that day," he muttered.
"Yes--there doesn't seem much doubt about this.  I wonder who this man
Ambrose is?"

"We'll soon get to know something about that, Mr. Hetherwick!"
exclaimed Matherfield briskly.  "Now, I'm just going to put that wire
in my pocket, lock up this flat again, have another word or two with
that caretaker chap, and go in search of the information you refer to.
Come with me!  Later, I shall get a search warrant, and make a thorough
examination of this flat.  Let's be moving."

Downstairs again, Matherfield called up the caretaker.

"You say Dr. Ambrose has been away for a bit?" he asked.  "Is there
anything unusual in that?"

"Well, not so very," answered the man.  "Ever since he came here, two
or three years ago, he's been used to going away for a while.  I
believe he used to go over to Paris.  But I never remember him being
away more than a week at a time before."

"Evidently he's a doctor," suggested Matherfield.  "Did he ever have
patients come to see him here?"

The caretaker shook his head.

"No," he replied.  "He never had anybody much come to see him
here--never remember anybody, unless it was somebody he brought in at
night for a smoke, you know.  He generally went out early in a morning,
and came home late--very late."

"What about his meals?" asked Matherfield.

"He'd no meals here--unless he made himself a cup of coffee or so in a
morning," said the caretaker.  "All his meals out--breakfast, too.
Sundays as well as weekdays.  We saw very little of him."

"Who does up his rooms--makes the bed and so on?" inquired Matherfield.

"My wife," answered the caretaker.  "She does all that."

"And she hasn't had anything to do for--how long?"

"Well, it'll be three weeks, I'm sure.  He never used to say anything
at any time when he went off--just went.  He'd call downstairs when he
came back and let us know he was back, d'ye see?  But we never thought
he'd be as long away as this, this time.  It was only this morning,
just before you came, that my missus said to me that it seemed queer."

"Why queer?"

"Because he's taken nothing with him.  However short a time he might be
away before, he always took a suit-case, clean linen, shaving things,
so on--he was a very particular gentleman about his appearance--always
dressed like a swell and had a clean shirt every day; used to have a
nice heavy washing-bill, anyhow!"

"Did he seem to be pretty well supplied with money?" asked Matherfield.
"Or--the opposite?"

"Couldn't rightly say," replied the caretaker.  "Always paid his rent,
and us, and the washing regular, but as for anything else, why, we'd no
means of knowing.  Of course, as I tell you, he always looked the
gentleman."

"I see!" said Matherfield.  "All right--you'll see me again this
afternoon."

He strode away towards the Strand, and there ushered Hetherwick into
the first empty taxi-cab they met.

"Where now?" asked Hetherwick as Matherfield followed him into the cab
after a word to its driver.

"We're going now, sir, to Hallam Street, to the offices of the General
Medical Council," answered Matherfield promptly.  "I've had experience
of inquiring into the antecedents of medical men before, and I know
where to find out all about any of 'em.  I'm going to find out all
about this Dr. Charles Ambrose--that is, of course, if he's an English
doctor."

"Probably he isn't," remarked Hetherwick, "any more than Baseverie is."

"Ah, Baseverie!" exclaimed Matherfield.  "I'd forgotten that man for
the time being!  Well, while we're about it, we'll see if we can
unearth a bit of information concerning him.  We've done a bit of good
work this morning, ye know, Mr. Hetherwick!" he went on, rubbing his
hands with satisfaction.  "We've practically made certain that Ambrose
was the man who met Hannaford at Victoria, and we're sure he's the man
to whom Macpherson supplied the bottle in which the poison was
discovered at Granett's room.  And now we'll hope for a bit more
illumination in the darkness!"

Hetherwick presently found himself closeted with Matherfield and a
grave official who, after seeing Matherfield's credentials and
listening to his reasons for his visit of inquiry, began to consult
various books of reference.  Presently he left the room and was away
some time; when he returned he brought with him two slips of paper,
which he handed to Matherfield.

"I have had the particulars you require written out for you," he said,
"so you can examine them at your leisure.  I--" here he smiled
frostily--"I gather that you are somewhat anxious to get in touch with
these men?"

"I think it's extremely probable, sir, that before the day's over I
shall be exceedingly anxious to get in touch with both!" answered
Matherfield, with something very like a wink.  "More than anxious!"

The grave official nodded and smiled again, and Matherfield and
Hetherwick went away.  Outside Matherfield looked right and left.

"Mr. Hetherwick," he said, "it's well past twelve, and I'd my breakfast
before eight--I'm hungry!  Let's turn into the first decent place we
see and get a bite and a sup!  And we'll examine these papers."

He presently led Hetherwick into the saloon bar of a tavern, and
remarking that he had a taste for ale and bread and cheese at that time
of day, provided himself with these matters and retreated to a snug
corner, whither Hetherwick followed him with a whisky and soda.

"Here's success to our endeavours, Mr. Hetherwick!" said Matherfield,
lifting his tankard.  "I'm now firmly under the impression that we're
adding link after link to the chain!  But let's see what we've got here
in this crabbed writing."

He laid the slips of paper on the table at which they sat; both bent
over them.  There were not many words on either, but to Hetherwick they
were significant enough in their plain straightforwardness.


_Charles Ambrose, M.B.  (Oxon).  Medical Officer of Health, Crayport,
Lancs, _1903-4_; in practice Whiteburn, Lancs, _1904-9_; police
surgeon, Sellithwaite, W.R., Yorks, _1909-12_; in practice Brondesbury,
London, _1912-18_.  Struck off Register by General Medical Council for
unprofessional conduct, _1918.


"So much for him!" muttered Matherfield, his cheek bulging with bread
and cheese.  "I thought it would turn out to be something of that sort!
Now t'other!"


_Cyprian Baseverie, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S.  In practice Birmingham,
_1897-1902_; at Wyborough, Northants, _1902-11_; at Dalston, N.,
_1911-17_, Convicted of fraud at Central Criminal Court, _1917_, and
struck off Register by General Medical Council, _1918.


"Ho-ho!" exclaimed Matherfield.  "Been in the dock already, has he?
Well, well, Mr. Hetherwick, we continue to learn, sir!  We know still
more.  Baseverie's a convicted criminal.  Both have been struck off the
register.  Ambrose was certainly at Sellithwaite--and he'd be there,
according to these dates, at the time of the Whittingham affair.  A
promising pair--for our purpose!  What do you think?"

"I'm wondering if the two men know each other," answered Hetherwick.

"Shouldn't wonder," said Matherfield.  "Probably they do.  Probably
they're mixed up together in this affair.  Probably they're actual
partners in it--accessories to each other.  But now that I know this
much about them, I can find out more, especially about Ambrose, as he
was a police surgeon.  I can find out, too, what Baseverie's particular
crime was.  Defrauding a patient, I should imagine.  But I'll put one
or two men on to working up particulars and records of both Baseverie
and Ambrose this afternoon, and, of course, I shall go back and
thoroughly examine that flat in John Street."

"And, I suppose, in view of the evidence supplied by Macpherson, set up
a search for Ambrose?" suggested Hetherwick.

"To be sure!  We'll get out a 'tracked by the police' notice,
describing him to the best of our power," replied Matherfield.  "But
I'll tell you--in my opinion it'll be a stiff job getting hold of him.
If you want my opinion, as a private individual, he's probably got that
secret invention of Hannaford's and gone off across the Atlantic with
it--to turn it into money."

"That's very likely," assented Hetherwick.  "But what about Baseverie?"

"I'm not so much concerned about him now," said Matherfield.  "Ambrose
seems to be the man I want--first, anyway.  But I shall do what I can
to get hold of Baseverie.  If these Penteney and Blenkinsop people had
only come to us instead of laying plans of their own, some good would
have been done.  I shouldn't have let the man got away!"

"My belief," observed Hetherwick, "is that Baseverie and Ambrose are
partners in this affair.  And--how do we know that they didn't meet at
Dover, and that they haven't gone off together?"

Still wondering about this, Hetherwick next morning went round to
Lincoln's Inn Fields and asked to see one of the partners.  He was
shown into the room in which he and Matherfield had had their interview
on the previous day.  But he found Major Penteney alone.  Blenkinsop,
remarked the junior partner, had business in the Courts that morning.

"I called," explained Hetherwick, "to ask if you had any more
information about Baseverie's disappearance at Dover."

Penteney made a wry face.

"More vexed than ever about that!" he answered.  "Most inexcusably
stupid conduct on the part of our man--man we've always found so
reliable previously.  He came back yesterday afternoon, crestfallen,
told us all about it, and got a jolly good wigging.  He'd done well at
first.  Tracked his man from Riversreade Court to Dorking, and thence
to Redhill, and thence to Dover, after one or two changes.  Baseverie
put up at some hotel--I forget which--near the harbour; our man,
certain that Baseverie was quite unconscious that he was being
followed, put up there, too.  Nothing happened.  He saw Baseverie at
dinner that night, saw him in the smoking-room after; in fact, he had a
game of billiards with him, and saw him retire to bed; their rooms were
adjacent.  He felt sure of seeing him at breakfast, but when he went
down he found that the bird had flown--flown, said the night porter,
before six o'clock; he didn't know where.  Nor could our man trace him
at station or pier, or anywhere."

"Careless sort of watching," said Hetherwick.

"Worse than careless!" agreed Penteney.  "As I said, he caught it hot.
But now----"

The telephone bell on Blenkinsop's desk rang.  With a word of excuse
Penteney turned to it.  A moment later a smothered ejaculation of
surprise came from him, followed by a sharp interrogation on his part.
Suddenly he turned on Hetherwick.

"Good heavens!" he exclaimed.  "What's all this?  This is Lady
Riversreade speaking.  She says her sister, who came yesterday, and
Miss Featherstone have been kidnapped!  Kidnapped--this morning!"

Hetherwick leapt to his feet with a sharp exclamation--half amazed,
half incredulous.  But already his thoughts were with Rhona; he saw the
dangers of the situation for her as Penteney could not see them.

"Impossible!" he said.  "Kidnapped! in broad daylight?  And--from
there?"

But Penteney was still busy at the telephone, giving and receiving
rapid answers.

"Yes, yes!" he was saying.  "To be sure!--police--yes!  I'm coming
straight there now--car--tell the police to get busy."

He turned sharply to Hetherwick as he laid down the instrument.

"Fear there's no impossibility about it!" he said.  "Lady Riversreade
says they were carried off as they crossed from the Court to the
Home--she's heard something of a big car with strange men in it.  I'm
going down there at once--there's more in this affair than one sees at
first."

"I'll come with you," said Hetherwick.  "Where can we get a car--a fast
one?"

"Garage close by, in Kingsway," answered Penteney, hurriedly seizing on
one of several greatcoats that hung in a recess.  "Here!--get into one
of these--you're about my height, and the air's still nippy, motoring.
Now come on--we'll be there in under the hour.  You know," he
continued, as they left the office and hastened towards Kingsway, "I
think I see through something of this already, Hetherwick.  These
fellows probably believed they were kidnapping Lady Riversreade!--and
got her sister in mistake for her.  Ransom, you know!  The blackmailing
dodge failed--now they're trying this.  A desperate and dare-devil lot,
evidently!"

Hetherwick nodded a silent assent.  He was wondering whether or not to
tell Penteney that the Miss Featherstone of whom he had just spoken was
in reality the granddaughter of the man whose mysterious murder
appeared to be the starting-point of the more recent, equally
mysterious events.  That fact, it seemed to him, would have to come out
sooner or later--and there might be possible complications, perhaps
unpleasantness, when Lady Riversreade discovered that Rhona had gone to
her as a spy.  Might it not be well to take Penteney into his
confidence and explain matters?  But, on reflection, he decided to wait
until they knew the exact situation at Riversreade Court; so far, in
spite of Lady Riversreade's news he felt it difficult to believe that
two women, one of them, to his knowledge, a girl of character and
resource, and the other a woman of the world, used to travelling and to
adventure, could be carried off in broad daylight in immediate prospect
of two large houses--the thing seemed impossible.




CHAPTER XIX

THE LONDON ROAD

Some fifty minutes later, the big, powerful car, which Penteney had
commissioned in Kingsway, dashed up to Riversreade Court.  Hetherwick
found that there had been no exaggeration in Lady Riversreade's
telephone message.  She herself came hurrying out to meet them; there
were men standing about the terrace outside and others visible in the
park; a couple of uniformed policemen followed Lady Riversreade from
her study, where Hetherwick supposed her to have been in consultation
with them.  And her first glance was directed on Hetherwick himself;
she addressed him before Penteney could go through any hurried
introduction.

"I've seen you before!" she exclaimed abruptly.  "You were with my
secretary, Miss Featherstone, at Victoria, Sunday morning.  Are you
engaged to her?"

"No!" replied Hetherwick.  "But we are close friends."

"Well, Miss Featherstone's been run away with--and so has my sister,
Madame Listorelle," continued Lady Riversreade.  "That's the long and
short of it!  You seemed almost incredulous when I rang you up," she
continued, turning to Penteney, "but there's no doubt about it--they've
been kidnapped, under my very windows.  And we haven't a single clue, a
trace of any sort."

"So far, you mean," answered Penteney coolly.  "But come--but let me
hear all about it.  What are the details?"

"Details!" exclaimed Lady Riversreade.  "We don't know any details!
All I know is this--my sister came here from Hampshire yesterday
evening, to stay a few days.  This morning, after we had breakfasted,
she and Miss Featherstone set out across the park for the Home, leaving
me here--I meant to follow in a few minutes.  I did follow!--I wasn't
ten minutes behind them.  But when I got to the Home, they weren't
there, and Mitchell, the man at the door, said they hadn't come.  They
didn't come!  Eventually, I came back here, to find out if something
had happened and they'd returned by some other way.  But they weren't
here.  Then I began to make some inquiry.  One of the housemaids, who'd
been looking out of a top window, said she'd seen a car go at a great
rate down the middle drive in the direction of the high road soon after
Madame Listorelle and Miss Featherstone left the house.  And of course
there's no doubt about it--they've been carried off in that!  This is
more work of that man Baseverie's!"

"You said something over the 'phone about strange men being seen in the
car," remarked Penteney.

"Oh, that?--yes, the same girl said she thought she could see two men
sitting in the car," answered Lady Riversreade.  "Of course they'd be
strange."

Penteney turned to the policemen, at the same time tapping Hetherwick's
arm.  "I think we'd better go across the park and see for ourselves if
there are any signs of a struggle at any particular place," he said.
"I don't think either Madame Listorelle or Miss Featherstone likely
persons to be carried off without making a fight for it.  Have you been
across the grounds yet?" he added, to the elder of the two men.  "I
mean by the path they took?"

"Not yet, sir; we've only just arrived," answered the man.

"Come along, then," said Penteney.  He lingered a moment as Hetherwick
and the policemen left the hall, and said a few words to Lady
Riversreade; then he hurried out and headed his party.  "This way," he
continued, leading Hetherwick along the terrace, "I know the usual
route to the Home--plain sailing from here to there, except at one
spot, and there, I conclude, whatever has happened did happen!"

Hetherwick paid particular attention to the route along which Penteney
led his party.  The path went straight across the park, from the end of
the terrace at the Court to near the front entrance of the Home, and
from the Court itself it looked as if there was no break in it.  But
about half-way between the two houses there was an important break
which could not be seen until pedestrians were close upon it.
Transecting the park from its southern to its northern boundaries was a
sunk roadway--the middle drive to which Lady Riversreade had
referred--gained from the park above, on each side, by ornamental
steps.  Whatever happened in that roadway, Hetherwick saw at once,
could not have been seen from the higher ground above, save by anyone
close to its edge.  But two or three hundred yards or so from the
steps, which made a continuation of the path, the embankments of the
sunk road flattened out into the lower stretches of the park, and there
the road itself could be seen from the top windows of the Court, and
from those of the Home also.

Penteney paused at the top of the ornamental steps.

"If these two ladies have been carried off, as they certainly seem to
have been," he said, turning to his companions, "this is the spot!
Now, just let me explain the lie of the land.  The main road edges the
park at the northern end, as you all know.  But there is a good road at
the southern extremity, and the sunk road runs down from it.  A car
could come down from there, be pulled up here, and kept waiting until
the two ladies came along.  They would have to descend these steps,
cross the road, and ascend the steps on the other bank to get to the
other half of the park.  Now suppose they're forced into a car at the
foot of the steps--the car goes off for the main road and gets clear
away within a minute or two of the kidnapping taking place!  There's
the difficulty!  The thing would be easy to do--granted force.
Probably, the two captives were forced into the car at the point of
revolvers."

"That's about it, sir!" agreed the elder of the policemen.  "No choice
in the matter, poor things!  And, as you say, they'd be in and
off--miles off--before they fairly knew what had happened."

"Come down and let's see the roadway," said Penteney.

But there was nothing to see at the foot of the steps.  The road, like
all roads and paths on the Riversreade Court property, was in a perfect
state of repair, and there was scarcely a grain of dust on its
spick-and-span, artificially treated and smoothed surface; certainly
there were no signs of any struggle.

"That's how it's been, you may depend upon it," observed Penteney to
Hetherwick as they looked about.  "The men were waiting here with
revolvers.  They'd force them into the car and get in after them; a
third man, an accomplice, would drive off.  If only we had some more
definite information about the car and its occupants!"

"There's an old chap coming down the road who seems to have his eye on
us," remarked Hetherwick, looking round.  "He may have something to
tell.  After all, some of the people hereabouts must have seen the car!"

The old man, evidently a labourer, came nearer, looking inquiringly
from one to the other.  He had the air of one who can tell something on
occasion.

"Be you gentlemen a-enquirin' about a moty-car what was round here this
mornin'?" he asked, as he came up.  "I hear there was somebody a-askin'
questions that way, so I just come down-along, like."

"We are," answered Penteney.  "Do you know anything?"

The old man pointed up the sunk road to a part of the park where it was
lost amongst trees and coppices.

"Lives up there, I do," he said.  "My cottage, it be just behind they
trees, t'other side o' the road what this here runs into; my garden, it
runs down to the edge o' that road.  And when I was a-gardenin' this
morning--mebbe 'bout half-past-nine o'clock, that was--I sees a
moty-car what come along from your way, and turns into this here sunk
road.  Mebbe that's what you're a-talkin' 'bout?"

"No doubt," agreed Penteney.  "And we're much obliged to you.  Now what
sort of a car was it?  Closed, or open?"

"Oh, 'twas closed up, same as one o' they old cabs what us don't see no
more now," said the old man.  "But I see inside it, for all that.  Two
gentlemen."

"Two gentlemen, eh?" repeated Penteney.  "Just so.  And a driver
outside, of course."

"Oh, aye; there was a driver outside, to be sure.  In livery, he
was--like a gentleman's servant.  Smart feller!"

"Could you describe the gentlemen?"

"No, surely--two gentlemen, though; a-sitting back, I sees 'em!  And
sees the moty-car, too, turn down this here very road."

"What sort of car was it?" inquired Penteney.  "What colour was it
painted?"

"Well, now, you beats me!  It med be a sort o' greyish colour--or
again, it med be a sort o' yaller, lightish yaller, or it med be
drabbish--I couldn' 'zac'ly go to for say what it was, proper.  But a
lightish colour."

"Lightish--grey, yellow, or drab--something of that sort?"

"Surely!  Her wasn't a dark 'un, anyhow.  But the feller what drove,
now he were in a dark livery--I took partic'lar notice of he, 'cause he
was so smart as never was.  Green! that was his colour, and gold lace.
Looked like a duke, he did!  And I thought, hearin' as there was them
in the park as was inquirin', like, as 'ow I'd come and tell 'ee."

Penteney rewarded the informant with some silver, and turned to his
companions with a shake of the head.

"A light-coloured car with two men in it, driven by a man who wore a
dark-green livery with gold lace on it!" he remarked.  "That's about
all we're likely to get.  And--if this has been a carefully-planned
affair, the chauffeur would change his livery before they'd gone
far--slip another coat on!  However----"

They went back to the Court, consulting together; obviously, there was
nothing to do but to send out inquiries in the surrounding country.
Penteney was sceptical about the success of these.

"When one considers the thousands of cars to be seen in any given area
during one morning," he said, "how can one expect that anybody, even
rustics, should give special attention to any particular one?  There's
no doubt about it--they've got clean away!"

It seemed as if nothing could be done but to give the kidnapping full
publicity through the police and the press.  In the neighbourhood of
the Court nobody beyond the housemaid and the old cottager appeared to
have seen the car and its occupants.  But during the afternoon, as
Hetherwick and Penteney were about to set out for London, a man came to
the house and asked to see Lady Riversreade.  Lady Riversreade went out
to him; the two men accompanied her, and found at the hall door an
elderly, respectable-looking fellow who had driven up in a light cart.
He had heard, he said, of what had happened at Riversreade Court that
morning, and he believed he could tell something, for he was sure that
he had seen a car, such as that the police were inquiring after, pass
his house.

"And where is that?" asked Lady Riversreade.

"About two miles the other side of Dorking, my lady, on the London
Road.  I'm a market gardener--name of Thomas Chillam.  And I was
outside my garden gate this morning, about, as near as I can reckon,
ten o'clock, when I saw a car, light-coloured, coming from Dorking, at
a particularly high speed--a good deal faster than it had any right to
do!  I watched it careful, my lady.  But just as it got near to my
place, there was a man drove some sheep out of a by-lane, a few yards
past my garden and the car was obliged to slow down.  And so I saw the
folks in it."

"Yes?" said Lady Riversreade.  "And--who was in it?"

"There was a couple of men, my lady, on the front seat, and a couple of
ladies in the back.  Of course, it was a closed car, but I saw 'em,
plain enough, all four.  It seemed to me as if they were all either
quarrelling or having high words--they were all talking together,
anyway.  But though the car had slowed down 'cause of the sheep, it was
still moving at a fair pace, and, of course, they were past and gone,
London way, in a minute, as it were.  All the same, I saw 'em clearly
enough to see that one of the men inside was a man I've seen before."

"About here?" exclaimed Lady Riversreade.

"No, my lady," answered Chillam.  "In London.  It's this way, my
lady--me and my missis, we've a grown-up daughter what's in service in
London--Grosvenor Gardens.  Now and again we go up to see her, and stop
a night or two close by.  And of course we take a look round.  Now I've
seen that man two or three times about Victoria Station way--I knew him
at once when I saw him this morning, and----"

"Just tell us what he's like, will you?" interrupted Penteney.  "As
near as you can."

"Well, sir, I ain't good at that, but he's a tall, good-looking,
smart-dressed gentleman, with a beard and moustache--taller nor what
you and that other gentleman is, sir.  I seen him in Victoria
Street--mebbe it was his height made me notice him."

"And you're sure that was the man you saw in the car this morning?"

"Make no doubt on it, sir!  I'm as certain as that I see yourself.  Oh,
yes!"

Hetherwick put in a question.

"The second man in the car?  Did you notice him?  Can you remember him?"

Chillam reflected for awhile.

"I remember that he was a white-faced chap," he said at last.  "Wore a
top-hat, silk."

When Chillam had gone away, Hetherwick turned to his companions.

"That sounds like Ambrose, for one man, and Baseverie for the other,"
he said.  "What devilry are they up to now?  Penteney--we must get back
to London!"




CHAPTER XX

CONVERGING TRACKS

It was an hour later when they pulled up at Matherfield's head-quarters
and went in to find him.  Matherfield, brought to them after some
search, rubbed his hands at sight of them.

"Come at the right moment!" he exclaimed, "I've got news--of Ambrose!"

Matherfield evidently expected his visitors to show deep interest, if
not passive enthusiasm, in respect of this announcement, and he stared
wonderingly on seeing that their faces showed nothing but gloom and
concern.

"But you--you look as if you'd had bad news!" he exclaimed.  "Something
gone wrong?"

"I forgot that we might have telephoned you from Riversreade Court,"
replied Hetherwick, suddenly realising that Matherfield seemed to know
nothing of the day's happening.  "But I thought the Dorking police
would do that.  Gone wrong!--yes, and it may have to do with
Ambrose--we've heard news that seems to fit in with him.  But it's
this," he went on to give Matherfield a brief account of the day's
events.  "There you are!" he concluded.  "I've no doubt whatever that
Baseverie and Ambrose are in at this--kidnapping in broad daylight.
Matherfield, you've got to find them!"

Matherfield had listened with close attention to Hetherwick's story,
and now he looked from him to Penteney; from Penteney to a printed bill
which lay on his desk at his side.  "I think I see what all this is
about," he remarked, after a pause.  "Those chaps think they've got--or
they thought they got--Lady Riversreade!  To hold for ransom, of
course.  They took Miss Hannaford because she chanced to be there.
What they really kidnapped--and there's more of that done than you
gentlemen might think, I can tell you!--was Lady Riversreade's sister.
But now, however sisters--twin sisters--may closely resemble each
other, there comes a time when difference of identity's bound to come
out.  By this time--perhaps long before--those men must have discovered
that they laid hands on the wrong woman!  And the question is--what
would they do then?"

"It seems to me that the more immediate question is--where are the two
women?" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Think of their danger!"

"Oh, well, Mr. Hetherwick, I don't suppose they're in any personal
danger," answered Matherfield.  "They're in the hands of brigands, no
doubt, but I don't think there'll be any maltreatment of them--set your
mind at rest about that.  They don't do that sort of thing nowadays;
it's all done politely and with every consideration, I believe.  As to
where they are?  Why, somewhere in London!  And there are over seven
millions of other people in London, and hundreds upon hundreds of
thousands of inhabited houses--a lot of needles in that bundle of hay,
gentlemen!"

"They've got to be found!" repeated Hetherwick doggedly.  "You'll have
to set all your machinery to work!  This can't----"

"Wait a bit, Hetherwick," interrupted Penteney.  He turned to
Matherfield.  "You said you had news of this man Ambrose?  What news?"

Matherfield tapped the printed bill which lay on his desk.

"I had that circulated broadcast this morning," he answered.  "And
then, of course, the newspapers have helped.  Well, not so very long
before you came in, I was called to the telephone by a man named
Killiner, who told me he was the landlord of the Green Archer Tavern,
in Wood Street, Westminster----"

"Westminster again!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "That seems to be the
centre point!"

"And a very good thing to have a centre-point, Mr. Hetherwick," said
Matherfield.  "When things begin to narrow down, one gets some chance.
Well, I was saying--this man rang me up to say that if I'd go down
there he thought he could give me some information relative to the bill
about the missing man.  What he'd got to say, he said, was too long for
a telephone talk.  I answered that I'd be with him shortly, and I was
just setting off when you arrived.  Of course, I don't know what he can
tell--it may be nothing, it may be something.  Perhaps you gentlemen
would like to go with me and hear what it is?"

"I would, but I mustn't," replied Penteney.  "I must go to my office
and hear if Lady Riversreade or the local police have had any fresh
news.  Keep in touch with me, though, Matherfield--let me know what you
hear."

"I'll go with you," said Hetherwick.  "Westminster!" he muttered again,
when Penteney had gone.  "It looks as if this man Ambrose was known in
that district."

"Likely!" assented Matherfield.  "But you know, Mr. Hetherwick, there
are some queer spots in that quarter!  People who know the purely
ornamental parts of Westminster, such as the Abbey, and the Houses of
Parliament, and Victoria Street, and so on, don't know that there are
some fine old slums behind 'em!  But I'll show you when we get down
there.  We shall go through one or two savoury slices."

He was putting on his overcoat as he spoke, in readiness for setting
out, but before he had buttoned it a constable entered with a card.

"Wants to see you particularly, and at once," he said.  "Waiting
outside."

"Bring him in--straight!" answered Matherfield.  He pushed the card
along his desk in Hetherwick's direction.  "Lord Morradale!" he
exclaimed.  "Who's he?"

"The man who's engaged to Madame Listorelle," replied Hetherwick, in an
undertone.  "Hampshire magnate."

Matherfield turned expectantly to the open door.  A shortish, stoutish
person, who looked more like a typical City man, prosperous and
satisfied, came hustling in and gave Hetherwick and his companion a
sharp, inquiring glance which finally settled on Matherfield.

"Mr. Matherfield?" he asked.  "Just so!  I'm Lord Morradale--oh, of
course, I sent in my card--just so!  Well, Mr. Matherfield, I've had an
extraordinary communication from Lady Riversreade.  She telephoned to
my house in Hill Street this morning, but I was down in the City, and
didn't hear of her message till late this afternoon.  She says her
sister, Madame Listorelle, has been kidnapped!
Kidnapped--preposterous!"

"I'm afraid it's neither preposterous nor improbable, my lord,"
answered Matherfield.  "I'm quite sure Madame Listorelle has been
kidnapped, and Lady Riversreade's secretary, Miss Featherstone, with
her.  I've been down at Riversreade Court most of the day, and there's
no doubt about it--the two ladies were carried off from there by three
men in a fast car, which was driven towards London.  That's a fact!"

"God bless my soul!" exclaimed Lord Morradale.  "In broad daylight!
Twentieth century, too!  And is there no clue?"

"None so far, my lord.  Of course, we've noised the affair as much as
possible, and all our people are on the look out.  But it's a difficult
case," continued Matherfield.  "The probability is that the ladies have
been rushed to some house in London and that they're there in
captivity.  Of course, one theory is that the kidnappers took Madame
Listorelle for her sister.  They meant to get Lady Riversreade and hold
her to ransom."

Lord Morradale pursed his lips.  Then he rubbed his chin.  Then he
shook his head.  Finally he gave Hetherwick a shrewd glance, eyeing him
from head to foot.

"Um!" he said.  "Ah!  This gentleman?  Not one of your people, I think,
Matherfield?"

"No, my lord.  This gentleman is Mr. Hetherwick, of the Middle Temple,
who is interested very deeply in certain matters connected with the
affair.  Mr. Hetherwick has been down to Riversreade with me, and your
lordship can speak freely before him."

Lord Morradale gave Hetherwick a friendly, knowing nod.  Then he
glanced at the door, and Matherfield made haste to close it.

"Thank 'ee," said Lord Morradale.  "Just as well to be in private.
'Um!--I think I'd better tell you something, Matherfield.  I dare say
that's a reasonable supposition of yours--that these villains took
Madame Listorelle for her sister.  But I don't think they did.  I think
they knew very well whom they were seizing.  Mind you--they'd have
seized Lady Riversreade too if she'd happened to be there.  But it was
madame they were after!"

"If your lordship would explain----" suggested Matherfield.

"I'm going to--it's what I come here for!  I think I can just put you
on the right scent.  You may have heard that Madame Listorelle and I
are about to marry?  Very well, I accordingly knew a good deal about
her affairs.  Now, I don't know whether you know or not that Madame
Listorelle is actively concerned--or has been--in buying and selling
jewels on commission?  That's her speciality."

"Heard something of it, my lord," replied Matherfield.

"Very well.  Now, quite recently Madame Listorelle bought up in Paris a
magnificent set of stones which had been at one time the property of a
member of the Russian Imperial family.  She brought them here to
London, meaning, shortly, either to send or take them personally to
America to her customer.  This deal, unfortunately, got into the
papers.  Now, it's my belief that these fellows have kidnapped madame
in order to get hold of these jewels.  Do you see?"

"Ah!" exclaimed Matherfield.  "I see, my lord!  That puts a new aspect
on the case.  But--surely Madame Listorelle wouldn't have the stones on
her?"

Lord Morradale winked--deliberately--at both his hearers.

"No!" he said.  "No--she wouldn't.  But the scoundrels would figure on
this--that when she was fairly in their power they would be in a
position to make her give them up--to force her, in short, to disclose
their whereabouts.  If they're desperate villains, not likely to stick
at anything, I think they'll have forced madame to compliance--and in
doing so give you a chance to lay hands on them!"

"How, my lord?" asked Matherfield eagerly.

Lord Morradale gave the two men a confidential glance.

"This way," he replied.  "The jewels were deposited, for safety, by
Madame Listorelle at the Imperial Safe Deposit.  She rents a safe
there.  Now, don't you see what I'm suggesting?  These men may force
her to give them the necessary key and a signed order to the safe
people to let the bearer open madame's safe and take away a certain
case in which the jewels are packed.  That's what I think will be done.
And what you ought to do is to see the Imperial Safe Deposit officials
at once, warn them of what I suggest may happen, and take your own
means of watching for such a messenger arriving, and for tracking him
when he departs.  Eh?"

"Or arresting him there and then," said Matherfield.

"No, I shouldn't!" declared Lord Morradale.  "I'm not a policeman, you
know, but I can give a hint to one.  Instead of arresting the man--who,
you must remember, will be sure to have madame's written authority on
him--that is if things turn out as I suggest--I should carefully follow
him.  For--he'll probably go back to where madame and the young lady,
Miss What's-her-name, are detained!  Eh?"

Matherfield shook his head.

"I should doubt that, my lord!" he answered.  "If things work out as
you suggest,--and it's a highly probable theory--that's about the last
thing he would do!  Once the jewels were in his possession----"

"You forget this," interrupted Lord Morradale.  "They may use a
catspaw!  Eh?"

"Well, there's that in it, certainly," assented Matherfield.  "However,
I'll see that the Imperial Safe Deposit people are warned and that this
entrance is carefully watched to-morrow morning.  But--the thing may
have been done already!  There's been plenty of time since the ladies
were carried off."

"No!" said Lord Morradale.  "Nothing's happened so far.  I called in at
the Imperial Safe Deposit as I came here; they had neither seen Madame
Listorelle nor had any communication from her to-day.  And now the
place is closed for the night."

"Did you warn them, then?" inquired Matherfield.

"I didn't.  I thought it best to see you first," replied Lord
Morradale.  "The warning and the rest of it will come best from you."

"Very good, my lord.  Much obliged to your lordship for looking in,"
said Matherfield.  "We'll keep you posted up in anything that
happens--at Hill Street.  Now," he continued, when Lord Morradale had
left the office, "we'll get along to Westminster, Mr. Hetherwick, to
the 'Green Archer' and its landlord, Killiner."

The "Green Archer" proved to be a respectable tavern which boasted a
saloon bar.  Behind the glass screens of this they found a middle-aged,
sharp-eyed man, who at the sight of his visitors immediately opened the
door of a parlour in the rear and ushered them into privacy.  He
pointed silently to a copy of the bill asking for news of Ambrose.

"Aye!" said Matherfield.  "Just so.  I had your message.  You think you
know this man?"

"From this description of him in that bill, yes," replied the landlord.
"I think he's a man--gentleman, by all appearances--who used to come
into my saloon bar pretty regularly during this last six months.  Since
the end of last summer, I should say, up to about three weeks or so
ago."

"Not since then, eh?" asked Matherfield.  "Three weeks?"

"About that.  No--he hasn't been in for quite that.  But up to then
he'd been in, well, four or five days a week.  Handsome, fine man--in
fact, you've described him exactly there.  I never knew who he
was--used to pass the time o' day with him, you know, but that was all.
He always came in about the same time--one to one-thirty.  He'd have
sometimes a glass of bitter ale and a sandwich or two; sometimes a
whisky and soda and two or three biscuits.  Stood and had his snack and
went away.  Never talked much.  I took him for some gentleman that had
business hereabouts, and just wanted a bite and a sup in the middle of
the day, and turned in here for it.  But I don't know what business he
could be concerned in round here.  He hadn't the tradesman's look on
him, you understand.  I should have said he was a professional man of
some sort.  Always very well dressed, you know--smart.  However, I did
notice one peculiar thing about him."

"What now?" asked Matherfield.  "It all helps!"

"Well," said the landlord, "I noticed that his hands and fingers were
stained--all sorts of colours.  Sometimes it was more noticeable than
at others.  But there it was."

"Um!" remarked Matherfield.  He exchanged a knowing glance with
Hetherwick.  And when, a few minutes later, they left the tavern, he
turned to him with an air of assurance.  "I'm beginning to feel the
end!" he said.  "Feel it, if I don't see it.  Stained fingers, eh?
We've heard of them before, Mr. Hetherwick.  And I'll tell ye what it
is.  Somewhere about this very spot there's some place where men are
dabbling--secretly, I should think--with chemicals, and Ambrose is one
of 'em, and perhaps Baseverie another, and it was there that Hannaford
and that man Grannet had been that night, and where they were
poisoned--and there, too, no doubt, these two ladies are at this
minute!  Well--come to my place first thing in the morning."

Hetherwick, at a loss what to do further that night, went away and
dined, and, that done, strolled home to his chambers.  There was a
light in his parlour, and when he opened the door he found Mapperley,
evidently awaiting him, and with Mapperley a curly-headed, big-nosed,
beady-eyed young Jew.




CHAPTER XXI

THE ORDER IN WRITING

Hetherwick realised at once that Mapperley had news, and was waiting
there to communicate it.  But he looked not so much at Mapperley as at
Mapperley's companion.  Mapperley, as Hetherwick had remarked to more
than one person in the course of those proceedings, concealed his
sharpness under an unusually commonplace exterior; he looked, as a
rule, like a young man whose ideas rarely soared above a low level.
But the Jew was of a different aspect--Hetherwick was not quite sure
whether he was rat or ferret.  There was subtlety and craft written all
over him, from his bright beady eyes to his long, thin, dirty fingers,
and before Mapperley spoke his employer felt sure that in this son of
Israel the clerk had found a valuable associate.

"Hullo, Mapperley!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Waiting for me?  You've
some news, I suppose?"

Mapperley, grave and formal, pointed a finger at the Jew.

"Mr. Isidore Goldmark, sir," he said.  "Friend of mine.  I got him to
give me a bit of assistance in this Baseverie and Vivian affair.  The
fact is, sir, he knows Vivian's--don't you, Issy?"

"Thome!" replied Mr. Goldmark, with a grin.

"And he knows Baseverie, too," continued Mapperley.  "By sight, anyhow.
So I got him--for a consideration--to watch for Baseverie's next
appearance on that scene, and then, when he did come, to keep an eye on
him--trick him, in fact.  And Issy's seen him to-night, Mr. Hetherwick,
and followed him.  Then Issy came to me, and I brought him here."

"Good!" said Hetherwick.  "Sit down, both of you, and I'll hear about
it."  He dropped into his own easy chair and again regarding the Jew
decided that he was probably a creditable witness.  "What do you do at
Vivian's?" he asked.  "Employed there?"

Mr. Goldmark glanced at Mapperley and smiled knowingly.  Mapperley
nodded.

"All confidential, Issy," he said reassuringly.  "Going no further."

"Of course this is all confidential--and secret," remarked Hetherwick.
"I only want to know the precise connection between Vivian's and Mr.
Goldmark."

"It'th a thort of themi-official, mithter," answered the Jew.  "The
fact ith, I do a bit o' commith'on work for Vivian'th cuthtomerth, turf
you know.  Tho'--I'm in and out of an evening.  Thee?"

"I see," said Hetherwick.  "All right!  And you know Baseverie?"

"Ath well ath I know my own nothe," replied Mr. Goldmark.

"How long have you known him?"

"Thome time."

"Do you know what he is?"

"Aint an idea, mithter--and noboody elthe that I knowth of!  Liv'th on
hith wit'th, I should thay, if you athk me.  Wrong 'un!"

"Nor where he lives?"

"No, mithter!  All I knowth ith that he come'th to Vivian'th--now and
then."

"And you saw him to-night?"

"I did, mithter--to-night ath ever wath!"

"What time was that?"

"About eight o'clock, mithter--near ath I can fix it."

"Well, what happened?"

"Thith, mithter.  He came in about eight, ath I thay.  I wath there,
doing a bit o' bithneth with another cuthmur.  Batheverie, he didn't
thtop.  He wathn't in the plathe three minuteth, and while he wath in
he theemed--to me--to be a bit fidgety--thuthpithious, like.  Looked
round and about--cautiouth.  Then he went--and I followed him.
According to inthructionth from Mapperley there."

"Where did he go?"

"Well, mithter, I'll give you the particularth--in full: when I theth
out on a job o' that thort I do it proper.  He turned out o'
Candlethtick Pathage into the Lane, and he had a drink at a bar there.
Then he went to Trafalgar Square Tube.  I wath clothe behind him when
he booked----"

"A moment.  Does he know you?"

"May jutht know me by thite, mithter, but not enough to exthite any
thuthpithion in hith mind if he thaw me there behind him.  I never had
no truck with him--never thpoke to him."

"Well, go on.  Where did he book to?"

"Warwick Avenue, mithter.  Tho did I--of courth.  When we got there, I
followed him out--at a thafe dithtance.  He turned down to the Canal,
crothed the bridge, and went down to Thant Mary'th Manthion'th.  And
there he went in."

Hetherwick glanced at Mapperley.  Mapperley permitted himself to wink
at his employer--respectfully, but knowingly.

"Went into St. Mary's Mansions, eh?" said Hetherwick.  "Walked straight
in?"

"Straight in, mithter--front entranth.  I thee him, from acroth the
road, talking to the man in livery--porter or whatever he hith.  I
could thee through the glath doorth.  Then I thee both of 'em go up in
the lift.  Tho I waited about a bit, jutht to thee if he'd come out.
He did."

"Soon?" asked Hetherwick.

"He wath inthide about ten minuteth.  Then he came out.  Alone.  Thith
time he went in t'other direction.  I followed him acroth Paddington
Green to Edgware Road Tube, and there--well, to tell you the truth,
mithter, there I lotht him!  There wath a lot o' people about, and I
made thure he'd be going thouth.  But he mutht ha' gone wetht.  Anyway,
I lotht him altogether."

"Well--I think you saw enough to be of help," said Hetherwick.
"Now--just keep this to yourself, Goldmark."  He motioned Mapperley
into another room, gave him money for his assistant, and waited until
the Jew had gone, shown out by the clerk.  "Eleven o'clock!" he
remarked, glancing at his watch as Mapperley came back.  "Mapperley!
we're going out--to St. Mary's Mansions.  And after we've been there,
and made a call, you'd better come back here with me and take a
shake-down for the night--I shall want you in the morning, unless I'm
mistaken."

It was one of Mapperley's chief virtues that he was always ready to go
anywhere and do anything, and he at once accompanied Hetherwick to the
top of Middle Temple Lane, found a taxi-cab within five minutes, and
proposed himself to sit up and shakedown that night and the next, if
necessary.

"Scent's getting hot, I think, sir," he remarked as they drove off,
after bidding the driver carry them to Paddington Green.  "Things seem
to be coming to a head."

"Yes--but I don't think you know everything," answered Hetherwick.  He
proceeded to give the clerk an epitomised account of the day's doings
as they had related to himself, concluding with Matherfield's theory as
expressed after leaving the Green Archer.  "You're a smart chap,
Mapperley," he added.  "What do you think?"

"I see Matherfield's point," answered Mapperley.  "I can follow his
line.  He thinks like this: Hannaford, when he came to London, wanted
to get rid, advantageously, of that formula of his about a new ink.  He
got into touch with Ambrose, whom, of course, he'd known before at
Sellithwaite.  Ambrose introduced him to some men who deal or dabble in
chemicals, of whom one, no doubt, is Baseverie, and who seem to have a
laboratory or something of that sort somewhere in the Westminster
district.  On the night of the murder Ambrose met Hannaford, by
appointment, at Victoria, and took him there.  Probably, Hannaford left
the sealed packet--opened by that time--with these fellows.  Probably,
too, while there he told them--jokingly, very likely--what he'd
discovered, from the picture in the papers, about the identity of Mrs.
Whittingham and Madame Listorelle.  And now comes in--Granett!"

Hetherwick gave an exclamation that denoted two or three
things--surprise, for one.

"Ah!" he said.  "Granett!  To be sure!  I'd forgotten Granett!"

"I hadn't," remarked Mapperley with a cynical laugh.  "Granett--and his
murder--is an essential factor.  What I think is this: We know that
Hannaford met Ambrose at Victoria Station that all-important evening.
Ambrose, without doubt, took him to the place I hinted at just now--the
exact location of which is a mystery.  I think Hannaford stopped there
until late in the evening.  But--I also think he went back again!
With--Granett!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "I see!"

"We know," continued Mapperley, "that Granett went that evening to see
the chemist who gave information about him; we know, too, that he and
the chemist went and had a drink together, and parted at about closing
time, Granett then, according to the chemist, going towards Victoria
Street.  Now I think that Granett then met Hannaford--accidentally.
They'd known each other in Sellithwaite.  They talked--Granett told
Hannaford he was down on his luck.  Hannaford, evidently, was a
kind-hearted man, and I think he did two things out of kindness for
Granett.  He gave him that five-pound note----"

"That was got at Vivian's!" interrupted Hetherwick quickly.

"To be sure!" assented Mapperley.  "But we know that Hannaford had been
at Vivian's--with Baseverie--undoubtedly.  Taken there by Baseverie,
which makes me certain that for two or three days before his death he'd
been in touch with both Baseverie and Ambrose.  Hannaford got that
fiver in change at Vivian's.  And he gave it to Granett, on hearing his
story.  But he did something else--something that was far more
important--that is far more important--to us!"

"What?" asked Hetherwick.

"He turned back to the place he'd just left, and took Granett with
him!" answered Mapperley with confidence.  "He knew Granett was a
trained and qualified chemist; he thought he could get him a job with
these men who, presumably, were going to take up his own invention.  It
would be little more than half-past ten then.  Where else than at this
place are Hannaford and Granett likely to have been between that time
and the time at which they got into your carriage at St. James's Park?
Of course they were there--with Ambrose and Baseverie."

"As you put it--highly probable," said Hetherwick.  "Two and a half
hours--doing what?"

"Ah, now we come to the real thing!" exclaimed Mapperley.  "My own
belief is that Hannaford was fatally poisoned when he left those two
men the first time!  They'd two objects in poisoning him--or, to put it
another way, he'd entrusted them with two secrets--one about Madame
Listorelle; the other about his invention.  They wanted to keep both to
themselves and to profit by both.  The invention, no doubt, has
considerable value--Hannaford believed it had, anyway.  They thought
they could blackmail Madame and her sister, Lady Riversreade.  So,
before Hannaford left them the first time, they poisoned him--cleverly,
subtly, devilishly--knowing that so many hours would elapse before the
poison worked, and that by that time he'd be safe in bed at his hotel
and would die in his sleep.  But--he went back to them again, and took
another man with him!  So--that man had to die, too!"

Hetherwick thought awhile in silence.

"All very good theory, Mapperley," he said at last.  "But--it may be
nothing but theory.  Why did Granett run off at Charing Cross?"

"Because Granett knew that Ambrose lived in John Street, close by,"
replied Mapperley with promptitude.  "He may have known it before; he
may not have known it until that evening.  But--he knew it!  Most
likely he thought that Ambrose had returned home from the place in
Westminster: Ambrose may have left there before Hannaford and Granett
did.  Anyway, we may be reasonably certain that when Granett left you
with the dying or dead man, he ran off to Ambrose's flat--a few minutes
away."

"Why didn't he come back?" demanded Hetherwick.  "I'm only wanting to
get at probabilities."

"I've thought of that, too," replied Mapperley.  "I think he found
Ambrose out.  But by that time he'd had time to reflect.  He knew
something was wrong.  He knew that if he went back, he'd find the
police there, and would be questioned.  He might be suspected.  And
so--he went home, with the bottle in which Ambrose had given him a drop
of whisky for himself.  And--died in his sleep, as they thought
Hannaford would."

"Why should Ambrose have that bottle down at Westminster?" asked
Hetherwick.

"Why shouldn't he?" retorted Mapperley.  "A man who's taking a tonic
takes it at least three times a day--regularly.  He'd have his bottle
with him.  Probably there are several similar empty bottles there at
that place."

"Where is that place?" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Where?"

"Got to be found," said Mapperley, as the cab came to a stand.
"But--here's this!"

Hetherwick led his companion across Paddington Green and to the house
from which he and Matherfield had watched the flats opposite.  Late as
it was, the lodging-house keeper was up, and lent a willing ear to
Hetherwick's request that he should go with him to his friend the
caretaker of the Mansions.  That functionary was at supper.  He
continued to sup as Hetherwick, morally supported by the lodging-house
man, explained matters to him, but at last he allowed his cheek to
bulge with unswallowed food and turned a surprised and knowing eye on
his principal visitor.

"Blamed if I didn't wonder whether it was all O.K. with that chap!" he
exclaimed, banging the table with the haft of his knife.  "For all he
was quite the gentleman, I somehow suspicioned him!  And yet, he'd a
straight tale to tell: come here on Madame's behalf, to get something
for her out of her rooms, had her keys, and give me a note from her
saying as how I was to allow the bearer to go up to her flat!  What
more could I expect--and what could I do--under the circs?  I asks yer!"

"Oh, he had a note, had he?" inquired Hetherwick.  "In Madame's
writing?"

The caretaker laid down his knife, and thrusting his hand in his
breast-pocket, drew forth an envelope and silently handed it over.  It
was an azure-tinted envelope, of a very good quality of paper, such as
is only sold in high-class stationery shops, and the sheet inside
matched it in tint and quality.  But Hetherwick at once noticed
something about that sheet; so, too, did Mapperley, peering at it from
behind his elbow.  About an inch and a half had been rather roughly cut
off at the top; obviously some address had been engraved, or embossed,
or printed on the missing portion.  As for what was written on the
sheet, it was little--a simple order that the caretaker should allow
bearer to go into Madame Listorelle's flat.

"You recognised that as Madame's handwriting?" suggested Hetherwick.

"Oh, that's her fist, right enough, that is!" replied the caretaker.
"I knew it at once.  And no wonder!  I ain't no scholard, not me!--but
I knows enough to know that it 'ud puzzle one o' them here forgers as
ye reads about to imitate that there sort o' writing--more like as if
it had been done with a wooden skewer than a Christian pen!  Oh, that's
hers."

Hetherwick handed the letter and envelope to Mapperley, who was holding
out a hand.

"Well," he said.  "I wish ye'd just let me have a look into Madame's
flat.  There's something seriously wrong, and----"

"Oh, you can do that--'long as I'm with you," said the caretaker
readily.  He rose and led the way to the left, and presently ushered
them into a smart flat and turned on the electric light.  "Don't see
nothing wrong here," he observed.  "The chap wasn't here ten minutes,
and he carried nothing heavy away, whatever he had in his pockets."

Hetherwick and Mapperley looked round.  Everything seemed correct and
in order--the surroundings were those of a refined and artistic woman,
obviously one who loved order and system.  But on a desk that stood in
the centre of the sitting-room a drawer had been pulled open, and in
front of it lay scattered a few sheets of Madame Listorelle's private
notepaper, with her engraved address and crest.  Near by lay some
envelopes, similarly marked.  And with a sudden idea in his mind,
Hetherwick picked up a sheet or two of the paper and a couple of
envelopes and put them in his pocket.

A few minutes later, once more in the cab which they had kept waiting,
and on the way to Hill Street, whither Hetherwick had bidden the driver
go next, Mapperley turned to his employer with a sly laugh, and held up
something in the light of a street lamp by which they were passing.

"What's that?" asked Hetherwick.

"The order written by Madame Listorelle," answered Mapperley,
chuckling.  "The caretaker didn't notice that I carried it off,
envelope and all, under his very eyes!  But I did--and here it is!"

"What do you want to do with it?" demanded Hetherwick.  "What's your
notion?"

But Mapperley only chuckled again and without giving any answer
restored the azure-tinted envelope and its contents to his pocket.




CHAPTER XXII

THE HIGHLY-RESPECTABLE SOLICITOR

Lord Morradale, who kept up honest, country-squire habits even in
London, had gone to bed when Hetherwick and Mapperley arrived at his
house, but he lost little time in making an appearance, in pyjamas and
dressing-gown, and listened eagerly to Hetherwick's account of the
recent transactions.

"Force!" he muttered, nodding his head at each point of the story.
"Force! got it out of her by force.  That is, if the order's genuine."

Mapperley produced the sheet of paper, which he had filched under the
caretaker's eyes, and silently handed it over.

"Oh, that's Madame Listorelle's handwriting!" exclaimed Lord Morradale.
"Hers, without doubt.  Difficult to imitate, of course.  Oh, yes--hers!
Well, that proves what I've just said, Mr. Hetherwick--force!  She's in
their power--with the young lady, Miss--Miss--Featherstone, to be
sure--and they've made her write that.  Next, they'll make her write an
order on the Imperial Safe Deposit.  We must be beforehand with them
there.  Early--early as possible in the morning.  Meet me at
Matherfield's--I think he's pretty keen.  Bless me! what a pack of
villains!  Now I wonder where, in all London, these unfortunate ladies
are?"

"That's precisely what all this ought to help us to find out," remarked
Hetherwick.  "I'm not so much concerned about the valuables these men
are after as about the safety of----"

Lord Morradale gave him a quick, understanding glance.

"Of Miss Featherstone, eh?" he said.  "I see--I see!  And I'm
concerned, too, about Madame Listorelle.  Well, this, as you say, ought
to help.  But look here--we must be cautious--very cautious!  We
mustn't let Matherfield--you know what the police are--we mustn't let
him be too precipitate.  Probably--if a man comes to the safe place,
he'll go away from it to where these scoundrels are.  We must
follow--follow!"

"I agree," said Hetherwick.

"Nine o'clock, then, at Matherfield's," concluded his lordship.  "And
may we have a strong scent, a rousing one, and a successful kill!"

With this bit of sporting phraseology in their ears, Hetherwick and
Mapperley returned to the Middle Temple and retired for the rest of the
night, one to bed, the other to a shake-down on the sitting-room sofa.
But when Hetherwick's alarum clock awoke him at seven-thirty and he put
his head into the next room to rouse the clerk, he found that Mapperley
had vanished.  The cushions, rugs, and blankets with which he had made
himself comfortable for the night were all neatly folded and
arranged--on the topmost was pinned a sheet of brief-paper, with a
message scrawled in blue pencil.


_You won't want me this morning; off on an important notion of my own.
Look out for message from me about noon._

_M._


Muttering to himself that he hadn't the least idea as to what his clerk
was about, Hetherwick made a hurried toilet, and an equally hurried
breakfast, and hastened away to meet Matherfield and Lord Morradale.
He found these two together, and with them a quiet, solemn-faced
individual, clad in unusually sombre garments, whom Matherfield
introduced as Detective-Sergeant Quigman.  Matherfield went straight to
business.

"His lordship's just told me of your adventure last night, Mr.
Hetherwick," he said, "and I'm beginning to get a sort of forecast of
what's likely to happen.  It was, of course, Baseverie who went to
madame's flat last night--that's settled.  But what do you suppose he
went for?"

"Can't say that I've worked that out," answered Hetherwick, with a
glance at the others.  "But I imagine that he went there to get, say,
certain keys--having forced Madame Listorelle to tell him where they
were.  The keys of her safe at the Deposit place, I should think."

"No!" replied Matherfield, shaking his head knowingly, and with a sly
smile at Quigman.  "No, not that.  I'll tell you what he went for--a
very simple thing.  He went to get some of Madame's private notepaper!
He knew well enough that if he was to take an order on that Safe
Deposit to allow the bearer access to Madame's safe it would have to be
what the French, I believe, call _en rgle_--eh?  Written on her own
notepaper in her own handwriting, and so on.  See?"

"I think you're right, and I think he got it," said Hetherwick.  "A
drawer in her desk containing boxes of stationery had been pulled out,
and some of its contents lay about the desk.  As a matter of fact,
though I scarcely know why I did it, I put some paper and some
envelopes in my pocket--here they are!  I had a faint idea that they
might be useful--somehow."

"Well, that's the notion, depend on it," asserted Matherfield, glancing
at the paper which Hetherwick produced.  "I've no doubt that somebody,
representing Madame Listorelle, and bearing an authorization from her,
written on her notepaper in her own writing, will present himself at
the Imperial Safe Deposit this morning.  But--it won't be Baseverie!
And it won't be Ambrose!"

"A stranger, eh?" suggested Hetherwick.

"We shall see.  Now," continued Matherfield, glancing at the clock,
"we'll be off to the scene of operations.  This Imperial Safe Deposit
is in Kingsway--Holborn end--and very fortunately situated for our job,
being close to the Tube station; there'll be lots of people about
there, and we shan't attract attention.  And this is the way of it--his
lordship and myself will go into the Safe Deposit, see the people in
charge, explain matters, and get them to tell us at once if and when
the expected ambassador arrives.  We shall let him----"

"Or her," interrupted Quigman solemnly.

"Just so, my lad--it might be a she," assented Matherfield.  "Quite
likely!  We shall let him or her get what is wanted from the safe and
go away, closely followed by all four of us.  While Lord Morradale and
I are inside, you and Quigman, Mr. Hetherwick, will be outside,
talking, casually.  When we come out--and you'll both keep a sharp
watch on the entrance hall--I'll give you the office as to the
particular person we're following, and wherever that person goes, you
two will go.  But don't come near us--we'll keep one side of the
street, you the other.  If the person takes to a cab or a bus--well,
we'll have to do the same.  But I've reasons for thinking he or she
will stick to his feet!"

"How do we go?--all together?" asked Hetherwick.  "Because--it's a mere
idea--how do you know, Matherfield, that these people--there would
appear to be more than one concerned--aren't keeping an eye on you?"

"I've thought of that," answered Matherfield.  "No--we're all going
separately.  It's now nine-fifteen.  That Imperial Safe Deposit doesn't
open its doors till ten--nobody can get in there until that time,
anyway.  We all four go out of this office on our own hook.  Each takes
his own method of getting to the top of Kingsway.  As soon as I get
there, I go straight in and ask for the manager.  As soon as Lord
Morradale gets there, he follows suit--he and I forgather in the
manager's room.  As for you two, go how you like--fly, if it suits
you--or wander round the side streets.  But--you meet right opposite
the Safe Deposit entrance at precisely ten o'clock, and under pretence
of casual meeting and conversation keep your eyes on it, noticing
everybody who goes in and comes out.  That clear?  Then we all clear
out--one by one."

Outside, and left to his own devices, Hetherwick walked a little way
and then hailed a taxi-cab.  He gave his driver a confidential smile.

"You can just help me to employ forty minutes," he said, as he got in.
"Drive round--anywhere you like--up and down--as long as you put me
down at the corner of the Holborn Restaurant at precisely two minutes
to ten.  Got that?"

The driver comprehended, and began a leisurely journey round certain
principal streets and thoroughfares.  Two minutes before ten he pulled
up at the Holborn-Kingsway corner and gave his fare a grin.

"Done it to the second, sir," he announced, nodding at an adjacent
clock.

"Good man!" said Hetherwick, handing out something over the registered
fare.  Then an idea struck him.  "Look here!" he continued
confidentially.  "I--and another man--may have to follow somebody from
here, presently.  Just drive down the street here, keep your flag down,
and wait--if I want you, I shall be close at hand."

The driver showed his understanding by a nod and a wink and moved a
little distance off to the kerbstone.  Hetherwick walked slowly down
the west side of Kingsway.  And precisely as the clock struck ten he
saw Lord Morradale come from one direction and enter the
formidable-looking and just opened door of the Safe Deposit, and
Matherfield appear from the other: looking round again he was aware of
the solemn-faced Quigman who sauntered round the corner of Parker
Street and came towards him.  Hetherwick went on to meet him.

"There you are!" he said, doing a little acting in case any inimical
eyes were on him.  "To the minute!  We'd better appear to be doing a
bit of talk, eh?  The others have just gone in."

"I saw 'em, sir," replied Quigman, coming to a halt on the kerb, and
affecting an interest in anything rather than on what he was really
working.  "Ah!  But the question is--when will they come out?  Might be
in a few minutes--so to speak.  Mightn't be for hours--as it were!"

"You seem to be a melancholy chap," observed Hetherwick.

"Melancholy job!" muttered Quigman.  "Watching isn't my line.  But
Matherfield--he particularly wanted me to be in at this."

"Why?" asked Hetherwick.

"Peculiar knowledge of solicitors and their clerks in this part o'
London," replied Quigman.  "My line.  Matherfield, he's an idea that
the order to open this safe'll be presented by a solicitor."

"Good Lord!--has he?" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "I wonder!  But--"

"Big help to these chaps, don't you see, if they can make a solicitor
do the cat's-paw work," suggested Quigman.  "Who'd suspect a solicitor
of the High Court?  And as I know pretty nearly all of 'em--there's one
I know now coming up t'other side of the street," he continued
suddenly.  "That tallish, thin, pale-faced chap--see him?  Look at him
without seeming to look.  Now I wonder if he's the party we want?"

Hetherwick looked in the direction indicated.  He saw a youngish,
spectacled man in a silk hat, morning coat, and the corresponding
additions of professional attire, who was walking rapidly along from
South to north.  He was a very mild, gentle-looking person, not at all
the sort to be concerned in dark plots and mysterious aims, and
Hetherwick said so.

"Aye, well, you never know!" remarked Quigman lugubriously.  "But, as I
say, I know him.  Mr. Garrowell--Mr. Octavius Garrowell--solicitor, of
St. Martin's Lane, that is.  Been in practice for himself about four
years or so.  Nice young feller!--quiet.  And he is going in
there--see?"

Hetherwick saw.  There were several people, men and women, entering the
Safe Deposit just then, but Mr. Garrowell's silk hat and sloping
shoulders made him easily identifiable.

"I dessay it's him!" observed Quigman, with a sigh.  "Just the sort to
be took in, he is!  Innocent, unsuspecting sort o' gentleman.
However--it mayn't be.  Deal o' people use these Safe Deposits
nowadays."

Mr. Garrowell disappeared.  The two watchers waited.  Five, ten,
fifteen, twenty minutes went by; then Mr. Garrowell came out.  He came
out just as any man would come out after transacting his business,
quietly.  Nobody followed him: nobody seemed to be watching him--from
the Safe Deposit.  But Hetherwick noticed at once that whereas he had
entered carrying nothing but an umbrella, he now carried a small,
square, leather-covered box.  With this in his left hand he crossed the
roadway, and advanced straight towards Hetherwick and Quigman.

"No need to move, sir," whispered the detective.  "Take no notice--spot
him, though."

Mr. Garrowell, seen at close quarters, looked to be a somewhat
absent-minded gentleman.  But, chancing to look up as he stepped on the
pavement, his eyes encountered Quigman, who touched his hat.

"Morning, Mr. Garrowell," said the detective.  "Nice morning, sir."

"Morning, Quigman," responded Mr. Garrowell.  "A very nice morning!"

He nodded smilingly and went on his way, and round the corner into
Parker Street.  Quigman glanced at Hetherwick and shook his head.

"Not him!" he said.  "Matherfield's not following.  And, as I said, we
may have to wait--hours!"

But at the end of another ten minutes Matherfield and Lord Morradale
came together out of the entrance hall opposite.  An official, smiling
and talking, accompanied them to the threshold; when they left him they
came straight across the road.  And it was obvious to Hetherwick that
each was in a state of surprise--possibly, of perplexity.  Matherfield
hailed them as soon as he was within speaking distance.

"Here's a queer business!" he said.  "Did you see a
professional-looking chap come away just now who carried a small
leather box?"

"We saw Mr. Garrowell, solicitor, St. Martin's Lane," answered Quigman.
"I know him.  Gone down Parker Street."

"It was Garrowell," assented Matherfield.  "I know him, too.  Well," he
turned to Hetherwick, "it's a queer business.  They knew Garrowell
across there--he's been to Madame Listorelle's safe for her before.  He
came there just now, with the usual authorisation, on her notepaper,
went to the safe, got that small box, and went.  Garrowell--a
highly--respectable legal practitioner!"

"Why didn't you stop him and ask him questions?" inquired Hetherwick.

Matherfield exchanged a glance with Lord Morradale.

"Not there!" he said.  "It--well, it looks as if Madame really had sent
him!  Her business."

"Of course she'd sent him!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Sent him under
compulsion!  The whole thing's a clever plant!  These fellows probably
know that she's employed Garrowell now and then, and they forced her to
write a letter to him, authorising him to come here again, and
enclosing an order on the Safe Deposit people!  Don't you see?"

"By Gad, there's something in that, Matherfield!" said Lord Morradale.
"Didn't strike me, though!  'Pon my honour, I really thought he had
come direct from her.  Couldn't think why, exactly, but then, as
Matherfield says, a highly-respectable solicitor--eh?"

"We'll soon settle it!" exclaimed Matherfield suddenly.  "We'll go to
Garrowell's office.  Better discuss it there than have tackled him
here.  Anyway, he'll have the square box.  Quigman, call a taxi!"

"There's a man here waiting for me," said Hetherwick.  He signalled to
his former driver who quickly came alongside.  "For anything we know,"
he continued, as all four took their seats, and were driven off,
"Garrowell may have gone straight away somewhere to hand that box over!
We ought to have followed."

"I don't think so," replied Matherfield.  "The whole thing's queer, and
not at all what I expected.  Lord Morradale says that he never heard of
madame employing Garrowell, and yet the Safe people say he's been here
two or three times on her business.  But we'll soon have it out of him."




CHAPTER XXIII

THE LANDLADY OF LITTLE SMITH STREET

Garrowell's office proved to be up two flights of stairs in St.
Martin's Lane.  They were dark and dingy stairs, and none of the four
men clambering up them noticed that an office-boy, rushing
unceremoniously downward carried a small parcel with which he fled out
of the door and away down the street.  They were, indeed, thinking of
Garrowell--and within five minutes they were all in his private room.
For another five minutes Matherfield was explaining matters--explaining
to an obviously startled and much astonished listener.

"That's how it stands," concluded Matherfield.  "You've evidently got
the explanation, Mr. Garrowell.  Now----"

"But you surprise me!" broke in the solicitor.  "I've acted for Madame
Listorelle in two or three matters--I've got things from her safe for
her before, once or twice.  And I saw nothing unusual in the letter she
sent me this morning.  Here it is!  You can see it.  Her usual
notepaper--certainly her handwriting--nobody, I think, could imitate
that successfully.  You see what she says--I was to give the enclosed
authorisation to the Safe people, take out a small, square,
brown-leather-covered box from the safe, pack it up, and send it off to
Mr. C. Basing, Post Office, Southampton, at once, by express delivery.
Nothing unusual in all that, I think.  Of course, I carried out her
wishes.  But look at the letter."

All four men were looking at the letter.  It was as Garrowell
described, and whether it had been written under duress or not, the
writing was bold and firm.  But Matherfield seized on the envelope, and
after a glance at it, pointed to the postmark.

"See that!" he exclaimed.  "Posted in the S.W. district late last
night.  If madame had been at home in Paddington the postmark would
have been different.  Well--but the square box, Mr. Garrowell!  You've
got it, of course?  Do you know that that box probably contains jewels
worth----"

"The box?" ejaculated Garrowell.  "Got it?  Of course not!  It's gone!
The boy went off to the post office with it--oh, just before you came."

"Gad!" muttered Lord Morradale.  "Well--the post office, at once,
Matherfield!"

But Matherfield suddenly laughed, throwing up both hands as if with a
sudden inspiration.

"No, my lord, no!" he said.  "No!  The box is safe enough in the post.
It's off to Mr. C. Basing, Post Office, Southampton.  And when Mr.
Basing calls to collect it--he'll find me!"

There was triumphant conviction in Matherfield's tone: there was the
impulse to immediate action in the way in which he pulled out a railway
guide from his pocket, and rapidly turned its pages.  But Hetherwick
and Lord Morradale looked at each other.  And each saw that the other
was dubious.

"Yes," said Lord Morradale slowly.  "Um--no doubt, Matherfield.  But I
say, you know--those jewels are worth no end!  Safe enough, perhaps, in
the hands of the postal authorities, now they are there, but--there's
many a slip, you know, and----"

"You might take the postal authorities into your confidence," suggested
Hetherwick.  "These people are up to all sorts of wily tricks----"

Matherfield laughed quietly.  It was the laugh of a man who knows his
own business thoroughly, and is a little impatient of outside criticism.

"I know what I'm doing, gentlemen," he answered.  "Leave it to me as to
what I do with the post office people.  I've as good as got the
handcuffs on Baseverie or on Ambrose--perhaps on both!  This is how I
figure the thing," he went on, with a final glance at the time-table.
"These two men have got Madame Listorelle and the young lady-secretary
in their power, safe somewhere in London.  They forced madame, last
night, to write that letter to Mr. Garrowell here--we know what they
made her write.  Mr. Garrowell got the small box containing the jewels,
and he's sent it off, already, by express delivery, to Southampton.  It
will be there early this evening, and one or other of the men will be
there to meet it.  If Baseverie calls for it, Ambrose will be round the
corner.  If Ambrose calls for it, Baseverie will be close at hand.
Probably they're already in Southampton--they'd go this morning, to be
on the spot.  As soon as the box is in their hands they'll be
off--probably to the Continent, by Southampton and Havre.  They won't
try the Atlantic--the five days' voyage would be too risky.  They'll
make for France.  But they won't get to France--they'll find themselves
in the lock-up at Southampton before bed-time!  You see if that doesn't
come off, gentlemen, as sure as my name's what it is.  Now, Quigman,
you come with me.  We've just nice time to catch the one-thirty, and to
get in touch with the Southampton police, and lay our plans and make
our arrangements.  Some time to-night, gentlemen, you'll hear from me!"

Then Matherfield hurried Quigman away, and the three men left behind
looked at each other.  Mr. Garrowell was obviously much concerned, and
his hands, thin and nervous, trembled as he began to arrange the papers
on his desk.

"This is a most distressing business, gentlemen," he said.  "It is very
painful to me to think that I have been made an instrument in a crime
of this sort, however innocent a one!  But how could I tell that this
letter was forced out of Madame Listorelle?  On the face of it----"

"Oh, there's no blame attaching to you, Mr. Garrowell!" interrupted
Lord Morradale.  "On the face of it, the letter's genuine enough.  But
I wanted to ask you a question: How much do you know of Madame
Listorelle?  I mean, how often has she employed you?"

"Two or three times only," replied Garrowell.  "She came to me first
about an agreement which I had had to send her on behalf of another
client.  She seemed very friendly, and was kind enough to say that next
time she had any legal business she would remember me as she hadn't any
regular solicitor of her own.  I think," he added with a deprecating
smile, "she probably saw that I was beginning, and hadn't much to do."

"I see," said Lord Morradale, looking round at the somewhat humble
appointments of the office.  "And you've been to that Safe Deposit
place on her behalf--how often?"

"Twice.  On each occasion Madame Listorelle wrote her instructions from
abroad.  Once she was in Paris.  The other time she was at Nice.  The
instructions were similar on both occasions: I was to go to the Safe
Deposit, get a certain parcel or article and post it to an address
given.  The first time I sent a small parcel to Amsterdam--I have the
exact address and name; the second, to New York.  So that, of course,
when I got Madame's letter this morning, I saw nothing unusual in it."

"Just so!" agreed Lord Morradale.  "You wouldn't.  Well, I hope
Matherfield will clap the irons on the men who forced her to write it!
Eh, Hetherwick?"

"With all my heart!" responded Hetherwick "But I, too, want to ask Mr.
Garrowell a question.  How long," he continued, "have you been here, in
St. Martin's Lane?"

"Oh, four or five years," replied Garrowell.

"Then you know this district pretty well, of course.  Have you ever
come across a man whom I'll try to describe to you?"  He went on to
give an accurate, if concise, description of Baseverie.  "That man," he
concluded, "is sometimes seen around here."

Garrowell nodded.

"I know him!" he said.  "In fact, he's been in this very room--to see
me.  But I don't know his name, nor anything much about him.  He was
brought here by another man and he only stayed a few minutes."

"How much do you know about him--however little?" asked Hetherwick.

"This much.  You know that people who have invented things come to
solicitors for legal advice, and sometimes to get information as to how
they can best dispose of their inventions?  Well, about nine months ago
a man came to me who claimed to have invented a drop-bottle--that is, a
bottle from which you could only drop one drop of stuff at a time.  He
said such a thing was badly wanted, and that there ought to be a pile
of money in it.  He wanted to know how best to get it on the market.  I
didn't know, but I mentioned the matter to one or two people, and a man
I know--or knew at that time, for he's since dead, unfortunately--said
that he knew a man who was a sort of commission agent for
inventions--took up a good idea, don't you see, and introduced it--and
he promised to bring him to see me.  He brought him; the man he brought
was, without doubt, the man you describe.  His name was not mentioned,
but I am sure he was that man.  I don't know what your man is, but I
felt sure that the man I am talking about either was or had been a
medical man."

"Ah!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "What made you think that?"

"From his conversation--from the remarks he made about the bottle.  He
didn't take it up; he said my client was too late and was wrongly
informed into the bargain: there was such a thing, and a superior one,
already on the market.  He went away then, and, as I say, I never heard
his name, and I've never seen him since."

"That's the man we want!" said Hetherwick.  "If Matherfield can only
lay hands on him!  But we shall know more by midnight."

Outside, he turned to Lord Morradale with a shake of the head.

"We're no nearer to any knowledge of where the two women are!" he
exclaimed.

"Oh, I don't know!" responded Lord Morradale.  "I think we are, you
know.  You see, if Matherfield nabs those chaps, or even one of them,
he or they will see that the game's up, and will give in and say where
their captives are.  Odd business, Hetherwick, that people can be
kidnapped and imprisoned in broad daylight in London!"

"I don't think anything's impossible or odd--in London," answered
Hetherwick dryly.  "If one had only the least idea as to which quarter
of the town that car was driven, one might be doing something!"

"Lots of sub-sections in every quarter, and subsections again in each
of those," replied Lord Morradale with equal dryness.  "Take some time
to comb out this town!  No!  I think we must trust to Matherfield.
Nothing else to trust to, in fact."

But Hetherwick suddenly thought of Mapperley.  He began to wonder what
the clerk was after, what his notion had been.  Then he remembered
Mapperley's admonition to look out for a message about that time, and
excusing himself from Lord Morradale, he jumped on a bus and went along
to the Temple.  There, in the letter-box, he found a telegram:

  "_Meet me Victoria three o'clock.  Mapperley._"


Hetherwick set off for Victoria there and then.  But it was only a
quarter-past two when he got there, and as he had had no lunch, he
turned into the restaurant.  There, when he was half-way through a
chop, Mapperley found him, and slipped into a chair close by before
Hetherwick noticed his presence.

"Thought I might find you in here, sir," said Mapperley.  They were
alone in a quiet corner, but the clerk lowered his voice to a whisper.
"Well," he continued, bending across the table, "I've done a bit,
anyhow."

"In what way?" asked Hetherwick.

Mapperley produced from his breast pocket some papers, and from amongst
them selected an envelope--the azure-tinted envelope which he had
picked up from the caretaker's supper table at St. Mary's Mansions.

"You recognise this?" he said, with a sly smile.  "You know where I got
it.  This is the envelope which Baseverie took to the caretaker, with
the order to enter Madame Listorelle's flat.  You knew that I carried
it off, from under the man's nose, last night.  But you didn't know
why.  I only laughed when you asked me."

"Well, why, then?" inquired Hetherwick.

"This reason," replied Mapperley.  "We both noticed that the sheet of
paper on which the order had been written by Madame had been
shortened--there was no doubt that a printed or embossed address had
been trimmed off, rather roughly, too.  We noticed that, I say, both of
us.  But I don't think you noticed something far more important--far,
far more important--for our purposes."

"No," admitted Hetherwick.  "I didn't.  What?"

"This," said Mapperley, turning back the broken flap of the envelope.
"You didn't notice that here, on the envelope, is the name and address
of the stationer who supplied this stuff!  There you are--W. H. Calkin,
85, Broadway, Westminster.  You never saw that, Mr. Hetherwick.  But I
did!"

Hetherwick began to comprehend.  He smiled--gratefully.

"Smart of you, Mapperley!" he exclaimed.  "I see!  And--you've been
there?"

"I've been there," answered Mapperley.  "I saw a chance of tracking
these men down.  I couldn't get hold of Calkin till nearly noon, but I
got on like a house afire when I did get him.  You see," he went on,
"that paper is, to start with, of an unusual tint, in colour.
Secondly, it's of very superior quality, though very thin--intended
chiefly for foreign correspondence.  Thirdly, it's expensive.  Now, I
felt certain its use would be limited, and what I wanted to find out
from the stationer was--to whom he'd supplied it.  That was easy.  He
recognised the paper and envelope at once.  Of the handwriting on the
paper, he knew nothing whatever--Madame's writing, you know--that he'd
never seen before.  But he said at once that he'd only supplied that
particular make of paper and envelopes to three people, and for each
person he'd prepared a die, to emboss the addresses.  The embossing had
been done at his shop, and he showed me specimens of each.  One was for
the Dowager Lady Markentree, 120, Grosvenor Gardens.  That was no use.
The second was for Miss Chelandry, 87, Ebury Street.  That was out of
count, too.  But the third was what I wanted.  It was just the address,
56, Little Smith Street, S.W.1.  As soon as I saw it, I knew I'd got on
the right track."

"Go on!" said Hetherwick.

"The stationer, Calkin, didn't know the name of the man who ordered
this paper and gave this address," continued Mapperley.  "He knew him
well enough as a customer, though, and described him.  Baseverie,
without a doubt!  Calkin says that Baseverie, during the last few
months, bought various items of stationery from him--notebooks,
duplicating paper, office requisites, and so on.  He never knew his
name, but as he always carried away his own purchases, and paid spot
cash for them, that didn't matter.  Calkin supplied him with ten quires
of this paper and envelopes to match, a couple of months ago.
So--there you are!  And there I was--sure at last that Baseverie's
mysterious hiding-place was 56, Little Smith Street!"

"Good--good!" said Hetherwick.  "What next?"

"Well, I thought we could do with a bit of help," replied Mapperley,
smiling.  "So I left Calkin--bound to secrecy, of course--and
telephoned to Issy Goldmark.  Issy is just the sort of chap for games
of this sort!  Issy came--and he and I took a stroll round.  Do you
know Little Smith Street?"

"Not I!" answered Hetherwick.  "Never heard of it!"

"Oh, well, but it is a street," said Mapperley.  "It lies between Great
Smith Street and Tufton Street, back o' the Church House--not so far
from the Abbey.  Bit slummy down those quarters, round about--sort of
district that's seen decidedly better days.  Still, there's good, solid
houses here and there--56 is one of 'em.  From outside, it looks the
sort of house you can't get into--dark, silent, heavily-curtained
windows--sort of place in which you could murder anybody on the quiet.
Very substantial front door, painted dark green, with an old-fashioned
brass knocker--that sort of house.  We took a good look at it."

"See anything?" asked Hetherwick.

"Nothing but what I've told you--lifeless sort o' place," answered
Mapperley.  "However, having once seen it, I wasn't going to leave it
unwatched, so I posted Issy there, in the window of a convenient
public-house, and came away to telegraph to you.  And there Issy
is--either in his pub, or loafing round.  And now we ought to go and
hear if he's anything to report.  And if he hasn't--what then?"

"Just so," said Hetherwick.  "That's it--what then?  But before we do
anything at all, Mapperley, I'd better post you up as to what's
happened elsewhere this morning.  You see," he continued, when he had
finished his story, "if Matherfield's theory is correct, and Baseverie
has already gone to Southampton to collect that parcel on its arrival,
and if Ambrose has gone with him, we shan't find Baseverie at this
address.  But--we might inquire if he's known there."

Mapperley reflected a while.  Then an idea seemed to suggest itself.

"Pay your bill, sir, and let's get out to a Post Office Directory
somewhere," he said.  "We'll get the name of the occupier of 56, Little
Smith Street."

Ten minutes later they were looking down the long columns of names in a
directory; Mapperley suddenly pointed to what they wanted.

"There we are!" he said.  "Mrs. Hannah Mallett--boarding-house
proprietor."

"Come along!" said Hetherwick.  "We'll see Mrs. Mallett, anyhow."

But on arrival at Little Smith Street, Mapperley looked round first,
for his friend, Mr. Goldmark.  Mr. Goldmark materialised
suddenly--apparently from nowhere--and smiled.

"Afternoon, mithter!" he said politely to Hetherwick.  "Lovely weather,
ithn't it?  Ain't theen nothing, Mapperley, old bean!  Ain't been a
thoul in or out o' that houth, thinth you hopped it!  Theemth to me
it'th locked up."

"We'll see about that," remarked Hetherwick.  "Come with me, Mapperley.
You stay here.  Goldmark, and keep your eyes as open as before."

He advanced boldly, with the clerk at his heels, to the door of number
56, and knocked loudly on the stout panel, supplementing this with a
ring at the bell.  This dual summons was twice repeated--with no result.

"Somebody coming!" whispered Mapperley, suddenly.  "Bolted--inside--as
well as locked!"

Hetherwick distinctly heard the sound of a stout bolt being withdrawn,
then of a key being turned.  The door was opened--only a little, but
sufficiently to show them the face and figure of an unusually big
woman, an Amazon in appearance, hard of eye and lip, who glared at them
suspiciously, and as soon as she saw that there were two of them,
narrowed the space through which she inspected her callers.  But
Hetherwick got a hand on the door and a foot across the threshold.

"Mrs. Mallett?" he inquired in a purposely loud voice.  "Just so!  Is
Doctor Baseverie in?"

Both men were watching the woman keenly, and they saw that she started
a little, involuntarily.  But her head shook a ready negative.

"Nobody of that name here!" she answered.

She would have shut the door, but for Hetherwick's foot--he advanced it
further, giving Mrs. Mallett a keen, searching glance.

"Perhaps you know Dr. Baseverie by another name?" he suggested.
"So--is Mr. Basing in?"

But the ready shake of the head came again, and the hard eyes grew
harder and more suspicious.

"Nobody of that name here, either!" she said.  "Don't know anybody of
those names."

"I think you do," persisted Hetherwick sternly.  He turned to
Mapperley, purposely.  "We shall have to get the police----"

"Look out, sir!" exclaimed Mapperley, snatching at Hetherwick's arm.
"Your fingers!"

The woman suddenly banged the door to, narrowly missing Hetherwick's
hand, which he had closed on the edge; a second later they heard the
bolt slipped and the key turned.  And Hetherwick, as with a swift
illumination, comprehended things, and turned sharply on his clerk.

"Mapperley!" he exclaimed.  "Sure as fate!  Those ladies are in there!
Trapped!"

"Shouldn't wonder, sir," agreed Mapperley.  "And as you say--the
police----"

"Come back to Goldmark," said Hetherwick.

Going lower down the street and retreating into the shelter of a
doorway, the three men held a rapid consultation, suddenly interrupted
by an exclamation from the Jew, who still kept his eyes on the house:

"Th'elp me if the woman ain't leavin' that houth!" he said.  "Thee!
the--thee ith!  Lockin' the door behind her, too!  Goin' up the
thtreet!"

Hetherwick looked and saw, and pushed Goldmark out of the doorway.

"Follow!" he said.  "And for God's sake, don't miss her!"




CHAPTER XXIV

THE HOUSE IN THE YARD

The Jew silently and promptly set out in the wake of the hurrying
woman; presently she and her pursuer disappeared round a corner.

"That's the result of our call, Mapperley!" said Hetherwick.  "She's
gone somewhere--to tell somebody!"

"Likely!" assented Mapperley.  "But wherever she's gone, Issy
Goldmark'll spot her.  He's the eyes of a lynx."

"He let Baseverie slip him, the other night, though," remarked
Hetherwick.

"Well, there was some excuse for that," said Mapperley, "to begin with,
he was only instructed to find out where Baseverie went, and to end
with he had found out!  He'll not let this woman slip him.  She's good
to follow--plenty of her."

"I wish we knew what she'd left in that house," said Hetherwick.
"We'll have to find out, somehow!"

"That's a police job," replied Mapperley.  "Can't walk into people's
houses without a warrant.  And you say Matherfield's on the other
track?  However, I should say that this woman's gone off now to find
somebody who's principally concerned--she looked afraid, in my opinion,
when she saw me."

"She's in it, somehow," muttered Hetherwick.

"That house looks mysterious enough for anything.  We'll keep a close
watch on it, anyway, until Goldmark comes back, however long that may
be."

But the Jew was back within twenty minutes.  So was the woman.  She
came first, hurrying up the street quicker than when she had left it.
As far as the watchers could make out from their vantage point, twenty
yards away from her door, she looked flustered, distressed, upset.
After her, on the opposite pavement, came Mr. Issy Goldmark, his hands
in his pockets.

The woman re-entered the house; they heard the door bang.  A moment
later the Jew turned into the entry in which Hetherwick and Mapperley
stood, half hidden from the street.  He smiled, inscrutably.

"Thee her go back to her houth?" he asked.  "Well, I followed.  I thaw
where thee'th been, too."

"Where, then?" demanded Hetherwick, impatiently.

Goldmark jerked his head in the direction from whence he had come.

"Round that corner," he said, "you get into a regular thlum.  Little
thtreeth, alleyth, pathageth, and tho on.  In one of 'em, a narrow
plathe, where there'th a thort of open-air market, there'th a good
thithed pieth of blank wall, with an iron-fathen'd door in it.  Well,
the woman went in there--let herthelf in with a key that thee took from
her pocket.  Ath thoon ath thee'd gone in, I took a clother look.  The
door'th fathen'd with iron, or thteel, ath I thaid--jolly thtrong.
There ain't no name on it, and no keyhole that you can look through.
The wall'th a good nine or ten feet high, and it'th covered with broken
glath at the top.  Not a nithe plathe to get into, nohow!"

"Well?" inquired Hetherwick.  "She went in?"

"Went in, ath I thay, mithter, and the door clothed on her.  After I'd
taken a glimpth at the door I got a potht behind one of the thtalls in
the thtreet and watched.  She came out again in about ten
minitth--looked to me, too, ath if thee hadn't had a very plethant time
inthide.  Upthet!  And thee thet off back here, fathter than vhat thee
came.  Now thee'th gone into her houth again--ath you no doubt thaw.
And that'th all.  But if I wath you, mithter," concluded Issy, "I
should jutht find out vhat there ith behind that door and the wall
it'th thet in--I thhould tho!"

"That's a police job," said Mapperley once more.  "If we'd only got
Matherfield with us, we could----"  Hetherwick paused--thinking.  "Look
here, Mapperley," he continued, with a sudden inspiration.  "I know
what we'll do!  You get a taxi-cab, as quickly as possible.  Drive to
the police station where I usually meet Matherfield.  There's another
man there whom I know, and who's pretty well up in this
business--Detective-Sergeant Robmore.  Ask for him.  Tell him what
we've discovered, and ask him to come back with you and to bring
another man if he thinks it necessary.  Now then, Goldmark!  Tell
Mapperley exactly where this place is."

The Jew pointed along the street to its first corner.

"Round that corner," he said.  "Firtht turning to the right; then
firtht to the left; then firtht to the right--that'th the thpot.
Lot'th o' little thtallth in it--a bithy, crowded plathe."

"Didn't ye notice the name?" demanded Mapperley, half scoldingly.

"To be thure I did!" grinned Goldmark.  "Pencove Thtreet.  But it'th
better to dethcribe it than to name it.  And don't you go tellin' no
tackthy-driver to drive you in there!--cauth' there ain't room!"

Mapperley gave no answer to this piece of advice; he shot off in the
direction of Victoria Street, and Hetherwick turned to the Jew.

"We'll go and have another look at this place, Goldmark," he said.
"But we'll go separately--as long as we're in this street, anyway.  You
stroll off to that first corner, and I'll join you."

He crossed the street when the Jew had lounged away, and once more took
a narrow look at the house into which the big woman had vanished.  It
was as close barred and curtained as ever; a veritable place of
mystery.  For a moment Hetherwick doubted whether he ought to leave it
unwatched.  But the descriptions of the wall and door in Pencove Street
had excited his imagination, and he went on, turned the corner, and
rejoined Goldmark.  Goldmark at once went in front, piloting him into a
maze of unusually dirty and crowded streets, and finally into one,
narrower than the rest, on each side of which were tent-like stalls
whereon all manner of cheap wares were being offered for sale by
raucous-voiced vendors.  He saw at once that this was one of those
open-air markets of which there are many in the poorer neighbourhoods
of London, and wherein you can buy a sixpenny frying-pan as readily as
a paper of fried fish, and a gay neckerchief alongside a damaged orange.

Threading his way behind Issy, and between the thronged stalls and the
miserable shops that lined the pavement, Hetherwick presently came to
the piece of blank wall of which the Jew had told him.  The houses and
shops round about were old and dilapidated, but the wall was either
modern or had been rebuilt and strengthened.  It stretched between two
low houses, one used as a grocer's, the other as a hardware shop.  In
length, it was some thirty feet; in height, quite ten; its coping, as
Goldmark had said, was liberally embattled with broken glass.  The
door, set flush with the adjoining masonry, was a solid affair, faced
with metal, newly painted, and the lock was evidently a patent one.  A
significant fact struck Hetherwick at once--there was no sign of a bell
and none of a knocker.

"You say the woman let herself in here?" he asked, as he and Issy
paused.

"That'th it, mithter Hetherwick--let herthelf in," replied Issy.  "I
thee her take the key from her pocket."

Hetherwick glanced at the top of the wall.

"I wonder what's behind?" he muttered.  "Building of some sort, of
course."  He turned to a man whose stall stood just in front of the
mysterious door, and who at that moment had no trade.  "Do you know
anything about this place?" he asked.  "Do you know what's behind this
wall?  What building it is?"

The stall-keeper eyed Hetherwick over, silently and carefully.
Deciding that he was an innocent person and not a policeman in plain
clothes, he found his tongue.

"I don't, guv'nor!" he answered.  "'Aint a bloomin' notion!  I been
comin' here, or hereabouts, this three year or more, but I 'aint never
seen behind that wall, nor in at that there doorway.  S'elp me!"

"But I suppose you've seen people go in and come out of the door?"
suggested Hetherwick.  "It must be used for something!"

"I reckon it is, guv'nor, but I don't call nobody to mind, though, to
be sure, I see a woman come out of it a while ago--big, heavy-jawed
woman, she was.  But queer as it may seem, I don't call to mind ever
seeing anybody else.  You see, guv'nor, I comes here at about ten
o'clock of a morning, and I packs up and 'ops it at five--if there's
folks comes in and out o' that spot, it must be early in a morning and
late at night, and so I shouldn't see 'em.  But it's my belief this
here wall and door is back premises to something--the front o' the
place'll be on the other side."

"That's a good idea," said Hetherwick, with a glance at Goldmark.
"Let's go round."

But there was no going round.  Although they tried various alleys and
passages and streets that ought to have been parallel to Pencove
Street, they failed to find any place that could be a frontage to the
mysterious wall and its close-set door.  But the Jew's alert faculties
asserted themselves.

"We can thee vhat'th behind that vail, mithter, eathy enough if we get
one o' them thop-keeperth oppothit to let uth go upthtairth to hith
firtht floor," he said.  "Look right acroth the thtreet there, thtallth
and all, into vhatever there ith.  Try that one," he went on, pointing
to a greengrocer's establishment which faced the close-set door.  "Tell
him we're doin' a bit o' land thurveyin'--which ith thtrue!"

Hetherwick made his request--the greengrocer's lady showed him and
Goldmark upstairs into a bow-windowed parlour, one of those dismal
apartments which are only used on Sundays, for the purpose of adding
more gloom to a gloomy day.  She observed that there was a nice view
both ways of the street, but Hetherwick confined his inspection to the
front.  He saw across the wall easily enough, now.  There was little to
see.  The wall bounded a yard, bounded on its left and right sides by
the walls of the adjoining houses, and at its further extremity by a
low, squat building of red brick, erected against the rear of a high,
windowless wall beyond.  From its mere aspect, it was impossible to
tell what this squat, flat-roofed structure was used for.  Its
door--closed--was visible; visible, too, were the windows on either
side.  But it was easy to see that they were obscured, as to their
lower halves, by coats of dark paint.  There was no sign over the
building; no outward indication of its purpose.  In the yard, however,
were crates, boxes, and carboys in wicker cases; a curiously-shaped
chimney, projecting from the roof above, suggested the presence of a
furnace or forge beneath.  And Hetherwick, after another look, felt no
doubt that he was gazing at the place to which Hannaford had been
taken, and where he had been skilfully poisoned.

Goldmark suddenly nudged his arm, and nodded at the crowded street
below.

"Mapperley!" he whispered.  "And two men with him!"

Hetherwick, glancing in the direction indicated, saw Robmore and
another man, both in plain clothes, making their way down the street,
between the stalls and the shops.  With them, and in close
conversation, was a uniformed constable.  He turned to leave the room,
but Goldmark again touched his elbow.

"Before we go, mithter," he said, "jutht take another glanth at that
plathe oppothite, and it'ths thurroundin'th.  I thee where we can get
in!  D'ye thee, mithter Hetherwick, the wall between that yard and the
next houth--the right-hand thide one--'ith fairly low at the far end.
Now, if the man in that houth would let uth go through to hith
back-yard--vhat?"

"I see!" agreed Hetherwick.  "We'll try it.  But Robmore first--come
along."

He slipped some silver into the hand of the green-grocer's lady, and
went down to the street.  A few brief explanations to the two
detectives supplemented the information already given them by
Mapperley, and then Robmore nodded at the constable who stood by,
eagerly interested.

"We've been talking to him, Mr. Hetherwick," he said.  "He's sometimes
on day duty here, and sometimes he's on night.  He says he's often
wondered about this place, and it's a very queer thing that though he's
known this district more than a year, he's never seen a soul go in or
out of that door, and hasn't the least notion of what business, if it
is a business, is carried on there!"

"Never seen anything or anybody!" corroborated the constable.  "At any
time--day or night.  When I first came on this beat, maybe fifteen
months ago, that door had been newly set and painted, and the glass had
just been stuck a-top of the wall.  But it's a fact--I've never seen
anybody go in or come out!"

"I propose to go in," said Hetherwick.  "I think we've abundant cause,
knowing what we do.  It may be that the two missing ladies are there.
I've been having a look into the yard, and we could get into it easily
by going through the grocer's shop there, on the right, and climbing
the wall from his back premises.  What do you say, Robmore?"

"Oh, I think so!" agreed Robmore.  "Now we're on the job, we'll carry
it through.  Better let me tackle the grocer, Mr. Hetherwick--I'll see
him first and then call you in."

The other waited while Robmore entered the shop and spoke with its
owner.  They saw him engaged in conversation for several minutes; then
he came to the door and beckoned the rest to approach.

"That's all right," he said in an aside to Hetherwick.  "We can go
through to his back-yard, and he'll lend us a step-ladder to get over
the wall.  But he's told me a bit--he knows the two men who have this
place in the next yard, and there's no doubt at all, from his
description of them, that one's Ambrose and the other Baseverie.  He
says they've had the place almost eighteen months, and he thinks they
use it as a laboratory--chemicals, or something of that sort.  But he
says they're rarely seen--sometimes he's never seen them for days and
even weeks together.  Usually they're there of a night--he's seen
lights in the place at all hours of the night.  Well--come on!"

The posse of investigators filed through the dark little shop to a yard
at its rear, the grocer's apprentice going in front with a step-ladder,
which he planted against the intervening wall at its lowest point.  One
by one, the uniformed constable going first, the six men climbed and
dropped over.  But for their own presence, the place seemed deserted
and lifeless.  As Hetherwick had observed from the greengrocer's
parlour the windows were obscured by thick coats of paint;
nevertheless, two or three of the men approached and tried to find
places from which the paint had been scratched, in an effort to see
what lay inside.  But the constable, bolder and more direct, went
straight to the entrance.

"Door's open!" he exclaimed.  "Not even shut!"  He pushed the door
wide, and went into the building, the rest crowding after him.
"Hullo!" he shouted.  "Hullo!"

No answer came to the summons.  The constable crossed the lobby in
which they were all standing, and opened an inner door.  And Hetherwick
saw at once that the grocer's surmise as to the purpose to which the
place was put had been correct--this was a chemical laboratory, well
equipped, too, with modern apparatus.  But there was not a sign of life
in it.

"Nobody here, apparently," murmured one of the men.  "Flown!"

Robmore went forward to another door, and opening it, revealed a room
furnished as an office.  There was a roll-top desk in it, and papers
and documents lying there; he and Hetherwick began to finger and
examine them.  And Hetherwick suddenly saw something that made a link
between this mysterious place and the house he had called at earlier in
the afternoon.  There, before his eyes, lay some of the azure-tinted
notepaper which Mapperley had traced with the embossed address on it of
which the stationer had told.

"There's no doubt we've hit on the place at last, Robmore," he said.
"I wish we'd had Matherfield here.  But----"

Before he could say more, a sudden shout came from Goldmark, who, while
the others were investigating the lower regions, had courageously, and
alone, gone up the low staircase to the upper rooms.

"Mithter!" he called.  "Mithter Hetherwick! come up here--come up, all
of you.  Here'th a man here, a-thittin' in a chair--and th'elp me if I
don't believe he'th a thtiff 'un--dead!"




CHAPTER XXV

DEAD!

The rest of the searchers, hearing that startled cry from the Jew, with
one accord made for the upper part of the building.  Robmore and
Hetherwick reached him first; he was standing at the half-opened door
of a room, into which he was staring with eager eyes.  They pushed by
him and entered.

Hetherwick took in the general aspect and contents of that room at a
glance.  It had been fitted up--recently, he thought, from certain
small evidences--as a bed-sitting-room.  A camp-bed stood in one
corner; there was a washstand, a dressing table, a chest of drawers,
two or three pictures, a shelf of books, a small square of carpet in
the centre of the floor, the outer edges of which had been roughly and
newly stained.  On the bed lay, open, a suit-case, already packed with
clothes and linen; by it lay an overcoat, hat, gloves, umbrella; it was
evident that the man to whom it belonged had completed his preparations
for a departure, and had nothing to do but to close and lock the
suit-case, put on his overcoat and hat, pick up the other things and go
away.

But the man himself?  There was a big, old-fashioned easy chair at the
side of the bed--a roomy, comfortable affair.  A man lay, rather than
sat, in it, in an attitude which suggested that he had dropped there as
with a sudden weariness, laid his head back against the padded cushion,
and--gone to sleep.  But the men knew, all of them, as they crowded
into that room, that it was no sleep that they had broken in upon--it
was death.  This, as the Jew had been quick to see, was a dead
man--dead!

Hetherwick took him in as quickly as he had taken in his surroundings.
His head lay quietly against the padding of the chair, a little
inclined to his left shoulder: the face was fully visible.  It was--to
Hetherwick--the face of a stranger; in all his and Matherfield's
investigations it had not been described to them.  Yet he was certain
that he was looking on the man known to them by repute as Ambrose.
Disguised, of course--he had shaved off the dark beard and moustache of
which they had heard, and he could see at once that the loss of them
had made a remarkable difference in his appearance.  But nothing could
disguise his height and general build.  This, without doubt, was the
man Matherfield and he had hunted for, the man who had met Hannaford at
Victoria, who had disappeared from his flat in the Adelphi--the man who
was associated with Baseverie, and who----

"Dead as a door-nail!" muttered Robmore, bending close to the still
figure.  "And--he's been dead a good bit, too!--some hours, anyway.
Stiff!  Do ye know him, Mr. Hetherwick?"

Hetherwick said what he thought.  Robmore pointed to the things on the
bed.

"Looks as if he'd been taken with a seizure just as he was about to set
off somewhere," he remarked.  "Well, if this is the Dr. Ambrose we've
been seeking--but let's see if he's got anything on him to prove his
identity."

While the rest of the men stood by watching, he put his hand into the
dead man's inside breast pocket--he was wearing a smart, brand-new grey
tweed suit, Hetherwick, later on, remembered how its newness struck him
as being incongruously out of place, somehow--and drew out a
pocket-book.  Touching Hetherwick's elbow and motioning him to follow
him, he went over to the window, leaving the others still staring
wonderingly at the dead man.

"This is a queer business, Mr. Hetherwick," he whispered as they drew
apart.  "You think this is the Dr. Ambrose we were after?"

"Sure of it!" answered Hetherwick.  "He's shaved off his beard and
moustache, and that's no doubt made a big difference in his appearance,
but you may depend on it, this is the man!  But what's caused his
sudden death?"

Then a keen, vivid recollection flashed up in him, and he turned
sharply, glancing at the rigid figure in the background.

"What is it?" asked Robmore curiously.  "Something strikes you?"

Hetherwick pointed to the dead man's attitude.

"That's--that's just how Hannaford looked when he died in the railway
carriage!" he whispered.  "After the first signs--you know--he laid
back and--died.  Just like that--as if he'd dropped quietly asleep.
Can--can it be that----"

"I know what you're thinking," muttered Robmore.  "Poisoned!
Well--what about--eh--the other man?"

"Baseverie!" exclaimed Hetherwick.

"Why not?--to rid himself of an accomplice!  But--this pocket-book,"
said Robmore.  "Let's see what's in it.  Doesn't seem to be anything
very much, by the thinness."

From one flap of the pocket-book he drew out a wad of carefully-folded
bank notes, and rapidly turned them over.

"Hundred and fifty pounds there," he remarked.  "And what's this
paper--a draft on a New York bank for two hundred.  New York, eh?  So
that's where he was bound?  And this," he went on, turning out the
other flap.  "Ah! see this, Mr. Hetherwick?  He'd got his passage
booked by the _Maratic_, sailing to-night.  Um!  And Matherfield's gone
to Southampton, after Baseverie.  I'm beginning to see a bit into this,
I think."

"What do you see?" asked Hetherwick.

"Well, it looks to me as if Baseverie had gone ahead to collect that
box containing the jewels, and that Ambrose was to follow later, join
him there, when Baseverie had secured the loot, and that they were then
to be off with their harvest!  But--do you notice this--the name under
which the passage is booked?  Not Ambrose--Charles Andrews, Esquire.
Andrews!  And Baseverie is Basing.  Basing and Andrews.  Now I wonder
if they carried on business here under these names?"

"That's an unimportant detail," said Hetherwick.  "The important thing,
surely, is--that!  How did that man come by his death?"

"Well, but I don't think that is very important--just now," replied
Robmore.  "After all, he is dead, and whether he died as the result of
a sudden seizure, or whether Baseverie cleverly poisoned him before he
left, is a question we'll have to settle later.  But I'll tell you
what, Mr. Hetherwick--I'll lay anything he didn't poison himself!  Look
round--there isn't a sign of anything he's been drinking out of.  No,
sir--the other man's done this.  And if Matherfield has the luck to lay
hands on him to-night--ah!  But now, what was this your clerk,
Mapperley, told us as we came along about the Little Smith Street
landlady coming here this afternoon?"

"She was followed here by Goldmark," replied Hetherwick.  "Goldmark saw
her admit herself by a key which she took from her pocket.  She stayed
inside a few minutes, came out looking much upset, and hurried away to
her own house."

"And now you and I'll just hurry after her," said Robmore.  "After all,
she's living, and we'll make her find her tongue.  Of course, she came
in here expecting to find this man, and to tell him somebody was on the
look-out.  And--she found him dead!  Come round there with me, Mr.
Hetherwick, at once."

He turned to the other detective and the constable, and after giving
them some whispered instructions, left the room, Hetherwick, after a
word or two with Mapperley, following him.  But before they had reached
the outer door, they heard steps in the yard, and suddenly two men
appeared in the doorway.

If Hetherwick and his companion looked questioningly at these two men,
they, on their part, looked questioningly at Robmore and Hetherwick.
They were youngish men--Hetherwick set them down as respectably-dressed
artisans.  That they were surprised to find anyone confronting them at
the door whereat all four now stood, was evident; their surprise,
indeed, was so great that they came to a sudden halt, staring silently.
But Robmore spoke.  "Wanting somebody?" he asked sharply.

The two strangers exchanged a glance, and the apparently elder one
replied:

"Well, no!" he said.  "Not that we know of.  But might we ask if you
are?  And how you got in here?  Because this place happens to be ours!"

"Yours!" exclaimed Robmore.  "Your property?

"Well, if buying it, paying for it, and taking a receipt and papers
makes it so!" answered the man.  "Bought it this morning--and settled
up for it, too, anyway."

Robmore produced and handed over a professional card, and the faces of
the two men fell as they read it.  The elder looked up quickly.

"I hope there's nothing wrong?" he said anxiously.  "Detectives, eh?
We've laid out a nice bit on this--savings, too, and----"

"I don't suppose there's anything wrong that way," replied Robmore
reassuringly.  "But there's something uncommonly wrong in other ways.
Now look here, who are you two, and from whom did you buy this place?"

"My name's Marshall, his is Wilkinson," answered the leader.  "We're
just starting business for ourselves as electrical engineers.  We
advertised for a likely place hereabouts, and Mr. Andrews came to us
about this--said he and his partner, Mr. Basing, were leaving, and
wanted to sell it, just as it stood.  We came to look at it, and as
it's just the place we need to start with, we agreed to buy it.  They
said it was their own property, and to save law expenses we carried out
the purchase between ourselves.  And we paid over the purchase money
this morning, and got the papers and the key."

"What time was that?" asked Robmore.

"Ten o'clock or thereabouts," replied Marshall.  "By appointment, here."

"Did ye see both men--Basing and Andrews?"

"Both!  In that little room to the right.  We settled the
business--paid them in cash--and settled all up.  It was soon done,
then they stood us a drink and a cigar, and we went."

"Stood you a drink, eh?" said Robmore suddenly.  "Where?"

"Here!  Basing, he pulled out a big bottle of champagne and a
cigar-box, and said we'd wet the bargain.  We'd a glass apiece,
Wilkinson and me, then we left 'em to finish the bottle: we were in a
hurry.  But--is anything wrong?"

"What is wrong, my lad, is that the man you know as Andrews is lying
dead upstairs!" replied Robmore.  "Poisoned, most likely, by his
partner.  But, as I said just now, I don't suppose there's anything
wrong about your buying the property, providing you can show a title to
it; you say you've got the necessary papers?"

Marshall clapped a hand on the pocket of his coat.

"Got 'em all here, now," he said.  "But--did you say Andrews was
dead--poisoned?  Why, he was as alive as I am when we left the two of
'em together.  They were finishing the bottle----"

"Look here," interrupted Robmore.  "Wait awhile until we come
back--we've some important work close by.  There are people of ours
upstairs--tell them I said you were to wait a bit.  Now, Mr.
Hetherwick."

Outside the yard and in the crowded street, Robmore turned to his
companion with a cynical laugh.

"Champagne--to wet the bargain!" he said.  "Left them to finish it, eh?
And no doubt what finished Ambrose was in that champagne--slipped in by
Baseverie when his back was turned.  I'll tell you what it is, Mr.
Hetherwick, that chap's a thorough-paced 'un--he goes the whole hog!  I
only hope he won't be too deep for Matherfield at Southampton!  I shall
be anxious till I hear."

"Is it possible for him to escape Matherfield?" exclaimed Hetherwick.
"How can he?  I look on him as being as good as in custody already!
He's bound to call at the post office for that box."

"Is he, though?" interrupted the detective, with another incredulous
laugh.  "I'm not so sure about that, Mr. Hetherwick.  Baseverie is
evidently an accomplished scoundrel, and full of all sorts of tricks!
I'll tell ye what I'm wondering--will that parcel ever get to
Southampton post office, where it's to be called for?"

"Whatever do you mean?" demanded Hetherwick.  "It's in the post!
Posted this morning."

"No doubt," agreed Robmore dryly.  "By special delivery, eh?  And when
it gets to Southampton Station, it's got to be taken to the head post
office, hasn't it?"

"Well?" asked Hetherwick.

"There's many a slip twixt cup and lip--so the old saying goes,"
replied Robmore.  "That parcel may slip.  But isn't this the number
your clerk mentioned?"

The door of Mrs. Mallett's house looked more closely barred than
ever--if possible.  And no answer came to several summonses by bell and
knocker.  But presently Robmore tried the handle--the door opened at
his touch.

"Hallo!" he exclaimed.  "Open!  Um!  That seems a bit queer.
Well--inside!"

For the second time that afternoon, Hetherwick walked into a place that
seemed to be wholly deserted.




CHAPTER XXVI

WATERLOO

The detective, walking a little in advance of his companion, stepped
forward to a hall-table and knocked loudly on its polished surface.  No
answer came.  He went further along, to the head of a railed stair
which evidently communicated with a cellar kitchen; again he knocked,
more loudly than before, on an adjacent panel, and again got no reply.
And at that, turning back along the hall, he opened the door of the
room which faced upon the street, and he and Hetherwick looked in.  A
musty-smelling, close-curtained room that, a sort of Sunday parlour,
little used, cold and comfortless in its formality.  But the room
behind it, to which Robmore turned next, showed signs of recent
occupancy and life.  There was a fire in the grate, with an easy chair
drawn near to it; on the table close by lay women's gear--a heap of
linen, with needle and thread thrust in, a work-basket, scissors,
thimble; it required no more than a glance to see that the owner of
these innocent matters had laid them down suddenly, suddenly
interrupted in her task.

"I'll tell you what it is, Mr. Hetherwick!" exclaimed Robmore abruptly.
"This house is empty!  Empty of people, anyway."

"Silent enough, to be sure," agreed Hetherwick.  "The woman----"

"You've frightened her by calling here," said Robmore.  "Then she
slipped round to Pencove Street.  And there she found Ambrose dead!
She's some connection with him and Baseverie, because she possesses a
key that admits to that yard.  And finding Ambrose dead, she came back
here, got her things and cleared out.  There isn't a soul in this
house.  I'll lay anything on that!"

"It struck me that this might be the place where the two ladies were
detained," remarked Hetherwick.

"We'll soon see about that," declared Robmore.  "Come upstairs--we'll
search the place from top to bottom.  But stop, downstairs first."

He ran down the stair to the cellar kitchen, with Hetherwick at his
heels.  And at the door he laughed, pointing within.

"Look there!" he exclaimed.  "I told you you'd interrupted things.
See! there's one tea-tray, laid out all ready for two--cups and
saucers, teapot, bread and butter cut, cake.  There's another for one.
And there's the kettle, singing away like a bird on a bough.  What's
that mean?  The woman was going to carry up tea for two, somewhere;
t'other tray was for herself.  Well, you nipped that in the bud; she'll
have to get her tea somewhere.  But--the others?  Come upstairs."

Going back to the hall, he led the way up the main staircase.  There
were two stories above the ground floor; on the first were rooms the
doors of which, being opened, or being found open, revealed nothing but
ordinary things: of these rooms there were three, opening off a main
landing.  But on the next floor there were only two rooms; one was
unfurnished: at the door of the other, a few inches ajar, the detective
immediately paused.

"Look you there, now, Mr. Hetherwick!" he said, pointing here and
there.  "Here's recent work!  Do you see that a strong bolt, more like
a bar, has been fitted on the outside of this door, and the door itself
fitted with a new patent lock, key outside?  And, good Lord! a chain as
well.  Might be in a gaol!  But what's inside?"

He pushed the door open and revealed a large room, fitted with two
small beds, easy chairs, a table on which books, magazines, newspapers
lay; on the table, too, was fancy-work which, it was evident, had been
as hastily laid aside as the sewing downstairs.  Hetherwick bent over
the things, but Robmore went to the one window.

"Gaol, did I say?" he exclaimed.  "Why, this is a gaol!  Look here, Mr.
Hetherwick!--window morticed inside and fitted with iron bars outside.
Even if whoever's been in here could have opened the window, and if
there'd been no bars there, they couldn't have done anything though,
for there's nothing but a high blank wall opposite--back of some
factory or other, apparently.  But what's this?" he added, opening a
door that stood in a corner.  "Um! small bathroom.  And this," he
continued, going to a square hatch set in the wall next to the
staircase.  "Ah! trap big enough to hand things like small trays
through, but not big enough for a grown person to squeeze through.
Well, I shouldn't wonder if you're right, Mr. Hetherwick--this,
probably, is where these ladies were locked up.  But--they're gone!"

Hetherwick was looking round.  Suddenly his eyes lighted on a familiar
object.  He stepped forward, and from a chair near one of the beds,
picked up a handbag of green silk.  He knew it well enough.

"That settles it!" he exclaimed.  "They have been here!  This is Miss
Han--I mean Miss Featherstone's bag--I've seen her carry it often.
These are her things in it--purse, card-case, so on.  She's left it
behind her."

"Aye, just so!" agreed Robmore.  "As I say, they all left in a hurry.
I figure it out like this: the woman, who, of course, acted as sort of
gaoler to these two unfortunate ladies, when she made that discovery
round yonder, came back here, got her outdoor things, and cleared off.
But before she went, she'd the decency to slip up here, undo that
chain, slip the bolt back, and turn the key!  Then, no doubt, she made
tracks at express speed, leaving the ladies to do what they liked.  And
they, Mr. Hetherwick, having a bit o' common sense about 'em, did what
I should ha' done--they hooked it as quick as possible.  That's that,
sir!"

Hetherwick thrust Rhona's handbag into his pocket and made for the door.

"Then I'm off, Robmore," he said.  "I must try to find out where
they've gone.  I've an idea probably they'd go to Penteney's office.
I'll go there.  But--you?"

"Oh, I'm going back to Pencove Street," answered Robmore.  "Plenty to
do there.  But off you go after the ladies, Mr. Hetherwick, there's
nothing you can do round here now.  I'll keep that clerk of yours a
bit, and the Jew chap--they might come in.  We shall have some nice
revelations in the papers to-morrow, I'm thinking, especially if
Matherfield has the luck he expects."

"What are you going to do about this house?" asked Hetherwick as they
went downstairs.  "Do you think the woman will come back?"

"Bet your life she won't!" answered Robmore.  "Not she!  I should think
she's half-way across London--north, south, east or west, by this.
House?  Why, I shall just lock the front door and put the key in my
pocket.  We shall want to search this house narrowly."

Hetherwick bade him good-day for the time being, and hurried off to
Victoria Street, to fling himself into the first disengaged taxi-cab he
encountered, and to bid its driver go as speedily as possible to
Lincoln's Inn Fields.  He was anxious about Rhona--and yet he felt that
she was safe.  And he was inquisitive, too; he wanted to hear her
story, to find out what had happened behind the scenes.  He felt sure
of finding her at Penteney's office; she and Madame Listorelle, once
released from their prison, would naturally go there.

But the clerk whom he encountered as soon as he rushed into the outer
office, damped his spirits at once by shaking his head.

"Mr. Penteney's not in, sir," he answered.  "He was in until not so
long ago, but he got a telephone call and went out immediately
afterwards.  No, I don't know who it was that rang him up, Mr.
Hetherwick, nor where he went; seemed a bit excited when he went out,
and was in a fearful hurry."

Hetherwick concluded that Madame Listorelle had summoned Penteney, and
that he had gone to meet her and Rhona.  He went away, somewhat at a
loss--then, remembering that Matherfield had promised to wire from
Southampton, he turned towards his chambers.  At the foot of the stairs
he met his caretaker.

"Been a young lady here inquiring for you, Mr. Hetherwick," said the
man.  "Been here twice.  I said I didn't know when you'd be in--any
time or no time.  She said--but there is the young lady, sir--coming
back!"

Hetherwick turned sharply and saw Rhona coming across the square.
Hurrying to meet her and disregarding whatever eyes might be watching
them, he took both her hands in his in a fashion that brought the
colour to her cheeks.

"You're all right--safe?" he asked quickly.

"Sure?"

"I'm all right and quite safe, thank you," she answered.  "I--I've been
here twice before, but you were out.  I came to borrow some money.  I
left my bag and purse in--the place where we were locked up, and----"

Hetherwick pulled out the handbag and silently gave it to her.  She
stared at him.

"You've been--there!" she exclaimed.  "How----"

"Got in this afternoon, an hour ago," he answered.  "Here, come up to
my rooms!  We can't stand talking here.  Madame Listorelle--where's
she?"

"I left her at Victoria, telephoning to Major Penteney," replied Rhona.
"She, too, had no money.  She wanted me to wait until Major Penteney
arrived, but I wouldn't.  I walked here.  I--I thought you'd want to
know that we'd got out--at last."

Hetherwick said nothing until they had entered his sitting-room.  Then,
staring silently at her, he put his hands on Rhona's shoulders, and
after a long look at her, suddenly and impulsively bent and kissed her.

"By gad!" he said in a low voice.  "I didn't know how anxious I was
about you until I saw you just now!  But--now I know!"

Then, just as suddenly, he turned away from her, and in a
matter-of-fact manner lighted his stove, put on a kettle of water, and
began preparations which indicated his intention of making tea.  Rhona,
from an easy chair into which he had unceremoniously thrust her,
watched him.

"Liberty!" she said suddenly.  "We're both discovering something.  When
you've been locked up, day and night, for a while----"

"How was it?" he asked, turning on her.  "Of course, we know all about
the kidnapping--but the rest, until to-day?  Baseverie, of course?"

"Baseverie and another man," she answered.  "A tall, clean-shaven man,
whose name we never heard.  But Baseverie was the chief villain.  As to
how it was, they met us at the sunk road at Riversreade, forced us at
the point of revolvers into a car, and drove us off to London--to
Westminster--and into a house there, the house you've been in.
There----"

"A moment," said Hetherwick, who was finding cups and saucers.  "The
driver of that car?  He must have been an accomplice."

"No doubt, but we never saw him again.  We only saw those two and a
woman who acted as gaoler and brought our meals.  We were fed all
right, and they gave us books and papers, and actually provided us with
fancy work.  But they were inexorable about madame and her jewels.
They must have known all about them, because they got her own
notepaper----"

"I know all about that," said Hetherwick.  "I'll tell you my side of it
when you've had some tea.  Forced her, I suppose, to write the letters?"

"They forced her to do that just as they forced us into the car," said
Rhona, "with revolvers!  And--they meant it.  I suppose they've got the
jewels now?"

"Remains to be seen," replied Hetherwick.  "Did Madame Listorelle
happen to tell you what those jewels were worth?"

"She talked about little else.  Between eighty and ninety thousand
pounds.  She's in an awful state about them.  But it was literally a
question of her life or her jewels.  I don't know what they'd have done
with me.  But now--I'm all right!"

Hetherwick opened a tin box, and producing a plum cake, held it up for
Rhona to inspect.

"What d'you think of that for a cake?" he asked admiringly.  "Present
from my old aunt in the country--real, proper cake that.  Yes," he went
on, setting the cake on the table, "yes, yes; you're all right now.
But, by George----"

Rhona said nothing; she saw that his relief at seeing her was greater
and deeper than he cared to show.  She poured out the tea; they sat
discussing the recent events until dusky shadows began to fall over the
whole room.

"I ought to be getting back to Riversreade," she remarked at last.
"It's late."

"Wait a bit!" said Hetherwick, who by that time had told her all he
knew.  "There'll be a wire from Matherfield before long.  Don't go down
to Riversreade to-night.  Telephone to Lady Riversreade that you're
staying in town.  Her sister will be there by now, and will have told
her everything.  Wait till we get the wire from Matherfield; then we'll
go and dine somewhere, and you can put up at your old hotel in Surrey
Street for the night.  I want you to know what's happened at
Southampton and----"

He broke off as a knock came at his outer door.

"That'll be Matherfield's wire," he exclaimed "Now then----"

A moment later he came back to her with the message in his hand.

"It is from Matherfield," he said.  "Handed in Southampton West
six-nineteen.  Doesn't say if he's got him!  All he says is; 'Meet me
Waterloo, arriving eight-twenty.'  Well----"

"I wonder?" said Rhona.  "But Baseverie is----"

"Just what Robmore says," muttered Hetherwick.

"However--" he looked at his watch.  "Come along," he continued.
"We've just time to get some dinner--at Waterloo--and to be on the
platform when the eight-twenty comes in.  If only we could see
Baseverie in charge of Matherfield and Quigman first it would give me
an appetite!"

The vast space between the station buildings and the entrance to the
platform at Waterloo was thronged when Hetherwick and Rhona came out of
the restaurant at ten minutes past eight.  Hetherwick was inquiring as
to which platform the Southampton train would come in at when he felt a
light touch on his arm.  Turning sharply he saw Robmore.  Robmore gave
him a quiet smile, coupled with an informing wink.

"Guess you're on the same job, Mr. Hetherwick," he said.  "Wire from
Matherfield, eh?"

"Yes," replied Hetherwick.  "And you?"

"Same here," assented Robmore.  "Just to say I was to be here for the
eight-twenty--with help," he added significantly.  "I've got the help;
there's four of us round about.  Heard anything of those ladies, Mr.
Hetherwick?"

"Here is one of them," replied Hetherwick, indicating Rhona.  "They're
safe.  You'll hear all about it later.  But this business--what do you
make of Matherfield's wire?  Has he failed?"

"I'll tell you what I make of it," answered Robmore.  "I think you'll
find that Baseverie is on the train, with Matherfield and Quigman in
close attendance.  For some reason of his own, Matherfield means to
arrest Baseverie here--here!  That's how I figure it.  They've seen
Baseverie there and decided to follow him back to town.  As soon as
that train's in----"

A sudden, sharp exclamation from Rhona interrupted him and made both
men turn to her.  She clutched Hetherwick's arm, at the same time
pointing with the other hand across the space behind them.

"Baseverie--himself!" she said.  "There--under that clock!  See!  He's
going towards the gates!"

With a swift and unceremonious gesture Robmore laid a hand on Rhona's
shoulder, twisted her round and drew her amongst a group of bystanders.

"Keep out of sight, miss!" he muttered.  "He'll know you!  Now,
again--which man.  That with the pale face and high hat?  I see him.
Good to remember, too.  All right!  Stop here, you two.  If he moves in
this direction, Mr. Hetherwick, move away anywhere.  Wait!"

Robmore slipped away.  A moment later they saw him speak to a couple of
quiet-looking men, who presently glanced at Baseverie.  Hetherwick was
watching Baseverie, too.  Baseverie, quiet, unconcerned, evidently
wholly unsuspicious, had taken up a position at the exit through which
the Southampton passengers must emerge; he was smoking a cigar,
placidly, with obvious appreciation.

"You're certain that's the man?" whispered Hetherwick.

"Baseverie?  Positive!" declared Rhona.  "As if I could mistake him!
I've too good reason to remember his whole appearance.  But--here!
Daring!"

"Well," said Hetherwick, "something's going to happen!  Keep back--keep
well back!  We can see things from here without being seen.  If he
caught sight of you----"

Robmore came strolling back and joined them.

"All right!" he murmured.  "Four pairs of eyes, beside ours--that's
three pairs more--on him!  My men are close up to him, too.  See 'em?
One, two, three, four!  All round him, though he doesn't know.  I
shan't let him go, whether Matherfield turns up or not.  Cool customer,
eh?"

"The train's due," said Hetherwick.  He had Rhona's hand within his
arm, and he felt it tremble.  "Yes," he whispered, bending down to her,
"that's how I feel.  Tense moment, this.  But that scoundrel there----"

Baseverie was glancing at the big clock.  He turned from it to the
platform behind the gates, looking expectantly along its lighted
surface.  The others looked, too.  A minute passed.  Then, out of the
gloom at the further extremity of the vast station, an engine appeared,
slowly dragging its burden of carriages and came sighing like a weary
giant up the side of the platform.  The passengers in the front
compartments leapt out and began filing towards the exit.

"Now for it," muttered Robmore.  "Keep back, you two!  My men'll watch
him--and whoever's here to meet him, for he's expecting somebody."

Nothing happened for the first minute.  The crowd of discharged
passengers, men and women, civilians, soldiers, sailors, filed out and
went their ways.  Gradually it thinned.  Then Hetherwick's arm was
suddenly gripped by Rhona for the second time, and he saw that she was
staring at something beyond the barrier.

"There!" she exclaimed.  "There--the man in the grey coat and fawn hat!
That's the man who drove the car!  See!  Baseverie sees him!"

Hetherwick looked and saw Baseverie lift a hand in recognition of a
young, fresh-faced man, who was nearing the ticket-collectors, and who
carried in his right hand a small, square parcel.  But he saw more.
Close behind this young man came Matherfield on one hand and Quigman on
the other.  They drew closer as he neared the gate, and on its other
side the detectives drew closer to Baseverie.

"Now then," whispered Robmore, and stole swiftly forward.

It was all over so swiftly that neither Hetherwick nor Rhona knew
exactly how the thing was done.  Before they had realised that the men
were trapped, or the gaping bystanders had realised that something was
happening under their very noses, Baseverie and his man were two safely
handcuffed prisoners in the midst of a little group of silent men who
were hurrying both away.  Within a moment captors and captives were
lost in the outer reaches of the station.  Then the two watchers
suddenly realised that Matherfield, holding the square parcel in his
hand, was standing close by, a grim but highly satisfied smile in his
eyes.  He held the parcel up before them.

"Very neat, Mr. Hetherwick, very neat indeed!" he said.  "Uncommonly
neat--eh?"

But Hetherwick knew that he was not referring to the parcel.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE ASSURANCE

Rhona went back to her old quarters at the little hotel in Surrey
Street for that night, and next morning Hetherwick came round to her,
with an armful of newspapers.  Finding her alone, he laid them on the
table at her side with a significant nod of his head at certain big
black letters which topped the uppermost columns.

"Matherfield must have given plenty of informing news to the pressmen
last night," he remarked with a grim smile.  "It's all in there--his
own adventures at Southampton yesterday; mine and Robmore's in
Westminster, and all the rest of it.  I believe the newspaper people
call this sort of thing a story--and a fine story it makes!  Winding
up, of course, with the dramatic arrest of Baseverie at Waterloo!  I'm
afraid we're in for publicity for a time, worse luck!"

"Shall we--shall I--have to appear at that man's trial?" asked Rhona.

"That's unavoidable, I'm afraid, and at other things before that,"
answered Hetherwick.  "There'll be the proceedings before the
magistrate, and the adjourned inquest, and so on.  Can't be helped; and
there'll be some satisfaction in knowing that we're ridding the world
of a peculiarly cruel and cold-blooded murderer!  That chap Baseverie
is certainly as consummate a villain as I ever heard of.  A human
spider--and clever in his web-spinning.  But I wish one had a few more
particulars on one point--and yet I don't see how one's to get them."

"What point?" asked Rhona.

"That sealed packet, containing the details, or formula, or whatever it
is, of your grandfather's invention," replied Hetherwick.  "Where is
it?  What, precisely, is it?  Did Ambrose get it from him?  Has
Baseverie got it?  So far as I can make out, the whole thing began with
that.  Whether it was really worth a farthing or a fortune, your
grandfather brought to London something which he honestly believed to
be of great value, and there's no doubt that he got into the hands of
those two men, Ambrose and Baseverie, because of it.  There's no doubt,
either, that in conversation with them, he told them, perhaps jokingly,
what he knew about Madame Listorelle.  Nor is there any doubt that
these two murdered him.  Nor is there any doubt, in my mind, as to
_how_ they murdered him!  You must remember that both men were trained
medical men, and, obviously of a scientific turn of mind into the
bargain.  Each had doubtless made a deep study of poisons.  Such a
knowledge is of value to such men as they were--men of criminal
tendencies.  Probably they knew of a subtle poison easily administered,
the effects of which would not be evident for some hours.  No doubt
they _timed_ their work, so that their victim should die swiftly and
suddenly when well away from their laboratory.  And, of course, they
did the same thing in the case of Granett.  Granett paid the penalty of
being with your grandfather.  But for what did they murder your
grandfather?  Did they get rid of him so that they could keep his
secret about Madame Listorelle to themselves, and blackmail her and her
sister, or that they could rob him of his invention and turn it to
their own profit?  If the latter, then----"

He paused, looking inquiringly at Rhona, as if he expected her to see
what he was after.  But Rhona shook her head.

"I don't follow," she said.  "What then?"

"This," replied Hetherwick.  "If their desire to get hold of your
grandfather's secret was their motive, then that secret's worth a lot
of money!  Money which ought to come to you.  Don't you see?  Where is
the secret?  Where's the sealed packet?  I suppose the police would
search Baseverie last night--perhaps they found it on him.  We shall
hear--but, anyway it's yours."

Rhona made a gesture of aversion.

"I should hate to touch or have anything to do with it if it had been
in that man's possession!" she said.  "But I don't think there's any
doubt that they murdered my grandfather because of that secret.  Only,
I think, too, they'd a double motive.  The secret about Madame
Listorelle was their second string.  Probably they believed that Lady
Riversreade would be an easy prey.  And I think she would have been, if
she hadn't had Major Penteney to fall back on.  I know she was
dreadfully upset after Baseverie's first visit.  So I put it this
way--always have done: they thought they could sell grandfather's
invention for a lot of money, and get another lot out of Lady
Riversreade and Madame Listorelle as blackmail."

"Black money, indeed, all of it!" exclaimed Hetherwick.  "Well----"

A woman-servant put her head into the little parlour in which they were
sitting, and looked significantly at Rhona.

"There's a policeman downstairs, miss, asking for you," she announced.
"Leastways, he wants to know if you can tell him if Mr. Hetherwick's
here or been here."

Hetherwick went to the head of the stair; a policeman standing in the
hall below looked up and touched his helmet.

"Inspector Matherfield's compliments, sir, and could you step round and
bring Miss Hannaford with you?" he asked.  "There's new developments,
Mr. Hetherwick.  Important!"

"We'll come at once," assented Hetherwick.  "Ten minutes!"  He went
back and hurried Rhona away.  "What now?" he asked as they hastened
towards Matherfield's office.  "Perhaps they've extracted something out
of Baseverie?  Or possibly the newspapers have attracted the attention
of somebody who can give further news?"

The last suggestion strengthened itself when, on entering Matherfield's
room, they found him closeted with two strangers whose appearance was
that of responsible and well-to-do commercial men.  All three were
discovered in what looked like a serious and deep conversation, and
Hetherwick was quick to notice that the two unknown men looked at Rhona
with unusual interest.  Matherfield made haste to introduce her as the
late ex-Superintendent Hannaford's granddaughter, and Hetherwick as a
gentleman who had been much concerned in the recent proceedings.

"These gentlemen, Miss Hannaford and Mr. Hetherwick," he proceeded,
waving his hand at the others, "are Messrs. Culthwaite and Houseover,
manufacturing chemists, of East Ham--incidentally, they've also a big
place in Lancashire.  And having seen this morning's papers, in which,
as you've no doubt noticed, there's a good deal about our affair,
they've come straight to me with some news which will prove uncommonly
useful when Baseverie's put in the dock before the magistrate this
afternoon.  The fact is, Mr. Hetherwick, these gentlemen have supplied
a missing link!"

"What link?" asked Hetherwick eagerly.

Matherfield nodded at the elder of the two men, Culthwaite, who
produced a pocket-book, and extracted from it a sheet of paper.
Silently, he passed it over to Matherfield, who turned to Rhona.

"Now, Miss Hannaford," he said, with a note of triumph in his voice, "I
dare say you can positively identify your grandfather's handwriting and
his way of making figures?  Can you swear that this has been written by
him?"

Rhona gave but one glance at the paper before looking up with a glance
of positive assertion.

"Oh, yes!" she exclaimed.  "That is his writing, without a doubt!
Nothing could be more certain!"

Matherfield turned to Hetherwick.

"That's the formula for the ink!" he said.  "Now we've got the big
thing we wanted!  And Mr. Culthwaite will tell you how he got it."

Culthwaite, after allowing Hetherwick to look at the paper, carefully
replaced it in his pocket-book.  There was an air of anxiety about him
and about his partner concerning which Hetherwick began to make
guesses--they looked as if they were uncertain and uneasy.  But
Culthwaite was ready enough to tell his story.

"We got it in this way," he said.  "And I may as well say, as I've
already said to you, Mr. Matherfield, that I don't think we should have
got it at all if you police people hadn't been so reticent on that one
particular point--if you'd noised it abroad about Hannaford's secret we
might have been forewarned.  However, some little time ago, a man whom
we knew as Basing, and whom I firmly believe to be the Baseverie that
we've read about in the papers this morning--a man, mind you, that we'd
done business with now and then during the last year or so--came to us
and offered us the formula for a new black ink which he asserted would
drive every known ink off the market, all over the world!  He made
extravagant claims for it; he swore it was the first absolutely perfect
writing fluid ever invented.  He brought a sample of it which he'd made
up himself--he put it to various tests.  But he did more--he offered us
the use of the secret formula so that we ourselves could make and test
it before deciding whether we'd fall in with his suggestion, which was
that we should offer him a lump cash sum for the formula.  Well, we did
make the ink, from the formula, and we did test it, and there is no
doubt about it--it is all, and perhaps more, that Basing, or Baseverie
claimed for its excellence.  I needn't go into the drawbacks attaching
to most well-known inks--this has none of them.  And when Basing came
back to us, a few days ago, we decided to buy the formula from him.  We
agreed upon a cash price, and day before yesterday we paid the amount
over--at our office in East Ham."

"Yes?" said Hetherwick quietly.  "And--what was the price agreed upon?"

The two partners exchanged a glance; it seemed to Rhona, who was
watching them intently, that they looked more uneasy than before.  But
Culthwaite replied with promptitude.

"Ten thousand pounds!"

"How did you pay him?" asked Hetherwick.  "In cash?"

"No--by open cheque, at his own request.  That, of course, was as good
as cash.  But," continued Culthwaite, "as soon as we read the
newspapers this morning, we--that is, I, for I read the whole thing on
my way to business--went at once to our bank to see if the cheque had
been cashed.  It had--an hour or two after we'd handed it to Basing.
He'd taken the amount in Bank of England notes."

Hetherwick looked at Matherfield.

"Of course," he remarked, as if he were asking a question, "that
formula belongs to Miss Hannaford?  Baseverie had no right to sell
it--he stole it?"

"That's the fact, Mr. Hetherwick," assented Matherfield.  "These
gentlemen, innocently enough, bought stolen property.  But I've just
told them something that I'll now tell you.  We found the
money--notes--on Baseverie, last night.  Intact--in his pocket-book.
Of course, with that, and the jewels which his accomplice succeeded in
getting at Southampton, he'd got a nice haul.  But now we can easily
prove how he came by that ten thousand--and it'll go back to Messrs.
Culthwaite and Houseover there.  We can prove, too, from their
evidence, that Baseverie poisoned Mr. Hannaford for the sake of that
formula.  Baseverie's done!"

"These gentlemen will recover their ten thousand pounds, then?" said
Hetherwick.  "In that case"--he turned to the two partners--"I don't
see that you've anything to worry about?" he suggested.  "The formula,
of course, must be handed over to----"

"Well, now, that's just it, Mr. Hetherwick," interrupted the partner
who until then had kept silent.  "The fact is, sir, we don't want to
lose that formula!  We gave this man Baring or Baseverie ten thousand
pounds for it, but----"

"But you really believe it to be worth more, eh?" said Hetherwick with
a smile.  "I see!  Then in that case----"

"If we get back our ten thousand, sir, we shall be pleased to treat
with the rightful owner," said Culthwaite, after an exchange of looks
with his partner.  "In the meantime, the formula is safe and secret
with us.  We are well-known people----"

"We'll leave it at that, just now," answered Hetherwick.  "Miss
Hannaford will trust you to keep your word about safety and secrecy.
And later--business!"  He got up, and Rhona rose with him.  "Shall you
want us to-day, Matherfield?" he asked.  "If not----"

"No!" replied Matherfield.  "Merely formal business to-day--then, this
afternoon, he'll be brought up.  Only evidence of arrest and
application for adjournment.  You can go away, Mr. Hetherwick--we'll
let you both know when you're wanted."

Hetherwick led Rhona out, and once clear of the police precincts, smote
his stick on the pavement.

"When we're through with this business I'm hanged if I ever dabble in
crime affairs again, personally!" he exclaimed.  "Baseverie has been a
pretty vile example to tackle!  And that you should be dragged into it,
too!" he added, suddenly.  "That upset me more than anything.  However,
it's getting to an end, and then----"

He paused, while she looked up at him with a little wonder at his
vehemence.  Then, and as they were at that moment walking along a quiet
stretch of the less frequented side of the Embankment, she timidly laid
a hand on his arm.  He turned sharply, laying his hand on hers.

"I think you've been very considerate and thoughtful for me," she said.
"After all--it wasn't quite mere interest in crime that made you----"

"Good Lord, no!" he exclaimed quickly.  "At first, perhaps, half
that--half you!  I felt--somehow--that I'd got to look after you.  And
then--and when you disappeared--but I believe I'm a bit muddle-headed!
I'll tell you something--all that time you were lost, I--well, I
scarcely ever slept!  Wondering, you know.  And when you turned up
yesterday afternoon--but I want to ask you something that I'm not quite
clear about--I was certainly muddled just then!"

"What is it?" she asked.

Hetherwick bent down to her and dropped his voice.

"I was so glad, so relieved to see you, yesterday afternoon," he said,
"that--that I felt dazed--eh?  And I want to know--did I kiss you?"

Rhona suddenly looked up at him--and laughed.

"Oh, really, how amusing you are!" she said.  "Why, of course, you did!
Twice!"

"That's good!" he exclaimed.  "I--I thought perhaps I'd dreamt it.
But--did you kiss me?"

"Do you really want to be dead sure?" asked Rhona mischievously.  "Very
well--I did!"

"That's better!" said Hetherwick.




THE END









End of Project Gutenberg's The Charing Cross Mystery, by J. S. Fletcher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHARING CROSS MYSTERY ***

***** This file should be named 59893-0.txt or 59893-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/8/9/59893/

Produced by Al Haines
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's The Mythology of the British Islands, by Charles Squire

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Mythology of the British Islands
       An Introduction to Celtic Myth, Legend, Poetry, and Romance

Author: Charles Squire

Release Date: April 27, 2017 [EBook #54616]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHOLOGY ***




Produced by MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)






                          THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE
                            BRITISH ISLANDS

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             THE MYTHOLOGY
                             OF THE BRITISH
                                ISLANDS

                           AN INTRODUCTION TO
                          CELTIC MYTH, LEGEND
                          POETRY, AND ROMANCE

                           BY CHARLES SQUIRE

                    LONDON: BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
                    50 OLD BAILEY, E.C. GLASGOW AND
                           DUBLIN        MCMV

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE


This book is what its author believes to be the only attempt yet made to
put the English reader into possession, in clear, compact, and what it
is hoped may prove agreeable, form, of the mythical, legendary, and
poetic traditions of the earliest inhabitants of our islands who have
left us written records-the Gaelic and the British Celts. It is true
that admirable translations and paraphrases of much of Gaelic mythical
saga have been recently published, and that Lady Charlotte Guest's
translation of the _Mabinogion_ has been placed within the reach of the
least wealthy reader. But these books not merely each cover a portion
only of the whole ground, but, in addition, contain little elucidatory
matter. Their characters stand isolated and unexplained; and the details
that would explain them must be sought for with considerable trouble in
the lectures and essays of scholars to learned societies. The reader to
whom this literature is entirely new is introduced, as it were, to
numerous people of whose antecedents he knows nothing; and the effect is
often disconcerting enough to make him lay down the volume in despair.

But here he will at last make the formal acquaintance of all the chief
characters of Celtic myth: of the Gaelic gods and the giants against
whom they struggled; of the "Champions of the Red Branch" of Ulster,
heroes of a martial epopee almost worthy to be placed beside "the tale
of Troy divine"; and of Finn and his Fenians. He will meet also with the
divine and heroic personages of the ancient Britons: with their earliest
gods, kin to the members of the Gaelic Pantheon; as well as with Arthur
and his Knights, whom he will recognize as no mortal champions, but
belonging to the same mythic company. Of all these mighty figures the
histories will be briefly recorded, from the time of their unquestioned
godhood, through their various transformations, to the last doubtful,
dying recognition of them in the present day, as "fairies". Thus the
volume will form a kind of handbook to a subject of growing
importance-the so-called "Celtic Renaissance", which is, after all, no
more-and, indeed, no less-than an endeavour to refresh the vitality of
English poetry at its most ancient native fount.

The book does not, of course, profess to be for Celtic scholars, to
whom, indeed, its author himself owes all that is within it. It aims
only at interesting the reader familiar with the mythologies of Greece,
Rome, and Scandinavia in another, and a nearer, source of poetry. Its
author's wish is to offer those who have fallen, or will fall, under the
attraction of Celtic legend and romance, just such a volume as he
himself would once have welcomed, and for which he sought in vain. It is
his hope that, in choosing from the considerable, though scattered,
translations and commentaries of students of Old Gaelic and Old Welsh,
he has chosen wisely, and that his readers will be able, should they
wish, to use his book as a stepping-stone to the authorities themselves.
To that end it is wholly directed; and its marginal notes and short
bibliographical appendix follow the same plan. They do not aspire to
anything like completeness, but only to point out the chief sources from
which he himself has drawn.

To acknowledge, as far as possible, such debts is now the author's
pleasing duty. First and foremost, he has relied upon the volumes of M.
H. d'Arbois de Jubainville's _Cours de Littrature celtique_, and the
Hibbert Lectures for 1886 of John Rhys, Professor of Celtic in the
University of Oxford, with their sequel entitled _Studies in the
Arthurian Legend_. From the writings of Mr. Alfred Nutt he has also
obtained much help. With regard to direct translations, it seems almost
superfluous to refer to Lady Charlotte Guest's _Mabinogion_ and Mr. W.
F. Skene's _Four Ancient Books of Wales_, or to the work of such
well-known Gaelic scholars as Mr. Eugene O'Curry, Dr. Kuno Meyer, Dr.
Whitley Stokes, Dr. Ernest Windisch, Mr. Standish Hayes O'Grady (to
mention no others), as contained in such publications as the _Revue
Celtique_, the _Atlantis_, and the _Transactions of the Ossianic
Society_, in Mr. O'Grady's _Silva Gadelica_, Mr. Nutt's _Voyage of
Bran_, _Son of Febal_, and Miss Hull's _Cuchullin Saga_. But space is
lacking to do justice to all. The reader is referred to the marginal
notes and the Appendix for the works of these and other authors, who
will no doubt pardon the use made of their researches to one whose sole
object has been to gain a larger audience for the studies they have most
at heart.

Finally, perhaps, a word should be said upon that vexed question, the
transliteration of Gaelic. As yet there is no universal or consistent
method of spelling. The author has therefore chosen the forms which
seemed most familiar to himself, hoping in that way to best serve the
uses of others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS


           CHAP.                                          Page

              I. THE INTEREST AND IMPORTANCE OF CELTIC
                   MYTHOLOGY                                 1

             II. THE SOURCES OF OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE
                   CELTIC MYTHOLOGY                          8

            III. WHO WERE THE "ANCIENT BRITONS"?            18

             IV. THE RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT BRITONS AND
                   DRUIDISM                                 31


                   THE GAELIC GODS AND THEIR STORIES

              V. THE GODS OF THE GAELS                      47

             VI. THE GODS ARRIVE                            65

            VII. THE RISE OF THE SUN-GOD                    78

           VIII. THE GAELIC ARGONAUTS                       89

             IX. THE WAR WITH THE GIANTS                   107

              X. THE CONQUEST OF THE GODS BY MORTALS       119

             XI. THE GODS IN EXILE                         132

            XII. THE IRISH ILIAD                           153

           XIII. SOME GAELIC LOVE-STORIES                  184

            XIV. FINN AND THE FENIANS                      201

             XV. THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE GODS          227


                   THE BRITISH GODS AND THEIR STORIES

            XVI. THE GODS OF THE BRITONS                   251

           XVII. THE ADVENTURES OF THE GODS OF HADES       278

          XVIII. THE WOOING OF BRANWEN AND THE BEHEADING
                   OF BRN                                 289

            XIX. THE WAR OF ENCHANTMENTS                   298

             XX. THE VICTORIES OF LIGHT OVER DARKNESS      305

            XXI. THE MYTHOLOGICAL "COMING OF ARTHUR"       312

           XXII. THE TREASURES OF BRITAIN                  336

          XXIII. THE GODS AS KING ARTHUR'S KNIGHTS         354

           XXIV. THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE GODS          371


                    SURVIVALS OF THE CELTIC PAGANISM

            XXV. SURVIVALS OF THE CELTIC PAGANISM INTO
                   MODERN TIMES                            399

                 APPENDIX                                  419

                 INDEX                                     425

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE
                            BRITISH ISLANDS




                               CHAPTER I

                 THE INTEREST AND IMPORTANCE OF CELTIC
                               MYTHOLOGY


It should hardly be necessary to remind the reader of what profound
interest and value to every nation are its earliest legendary and
poetical records. The beautiful myths of Greece form a sufficing
example. In threefold manner, they have influenced the destiny of the
people that created them, and of the country of which they were the
imagined theatre. First, in the ages in which they were still fresh,
belief and pride in them were powerful enough to bring scattered tribes
into confederation. Secondly, they gave the inspiration to sculptor and
poet of an art and literature unsurpassed, if not unequalled, by any
other age or race. Lastly, when "the glory that was Greece" had faded,
and her people had, by dint of successive invasions, perhaps even ceased
to have any right to call themselves Hellenes, they have passed over
into the literatures of the modern world, and so given to Greece herself
a poetic interest that still makes a petty kingdom of greater account in
the eyes of its compeers than many others far superior to it in extent
and resources.

This permeating influence of the Greek poetical mythology, apparent in
all civilized countries, has acted especially upon our own. From almost
the very dawn of English literature, the Greek stories of gods and
heroes have formed a large part of the stock-in-trade of English poets.
The inhabitants of Olympus occupy, under their better-known Latin names,
almost as great a space in English poetry as they did in that of the
countries to which they were native. From Chaucer downwards, they have
captivated the imagination alike of the poets and their hearers. The
magic cauldron of classic myth fed, like the Celtic "Grail", all who
came to it for sustenance.

At last, however, its potency became somewhat exhausted. Alien and
exotic to English soil, it degenerated slowly into a convention. In the
shallow hands of the poetasters of the eighteenth century, its figures
became mere puppets. With every wood a "grove", and every rustic maid a
"nymph", one could only expect to find Venus armed with patch and
powder-puff, Mars shouldering a musket, and Apollo inspiring the
versifier's own trivial strains. The affectation killed-and fortunately
killed-a mode of expression which had become obsolete. Smothered by just
ridicule, and abandoned to the commonplace vocabulary of the inferior
hack-writer, classic myth became a subject which only the greatest poets
could afford to handle.

But mythology is of such vital need to literature that, deprived of the
store of legend native to southern Europe, imaginative writers looked
for a fresh impulse. They turned their eyes to the North. Inspiration
was sought, not from Olympus, but from Asgard. Moreover, it was believed
that the fount of primeval poetry issuing from Scandinavian and Teutonic
myth was truly our own, and that we were rightful heirs of it by reason
of the Anglo-Saxon in our blood. And so, indeed, we are; but it is not
our sole heritage. There must also run much Celtic-that is, truly
British-blood in our veins.[1] And Matthew Arnold was probably right in
asserting that, while we owe to the Anglo-Saxon the more practical
qualities that have built up the British Empire, we have inherited from
the Celtic side that poetic vision which has made English literature the
most brilliant since the Greek.[2]

We have the right, therefore, to enter upon a new spiritual possession.
And a splendid one it is! The Celtic mythology has little of the heavy
crudeness that repels one in Teutonic and Scandinavian story. It is as
beautiful and graceful as the Greek; and, unlike the Greek, which is the
reflection of a clime and soil which few of us will ever see, it is our
own. Divinities should, surely, seem the inevitable outgrowth of the
land they move in! How strange Apollo would appear, naked among
icebergs, or fur-clad Thor striding under groves of palms! But the
Celtic gods and heroes are the natural inhabitants of a British
landscape, not seeming foreign and out-of-place in a scene where there
is no vine or olive, but "shading in with" our homely oak and bracken,
gorse and heath.

Thus we gain an altogether fresh interest in the beautiful spots of our
own islands, especially those of the wilder and more mountainous west,
where the older inhabitants of the land lingered longest. Saxon conquest
obliterated much in Eastern Britain, and changed more; but in the West
of England, in Wales, in Scotland, and especially in legend-haunted
Ireland, the hills and dales still keep memories of the ancient gods of
the ancient race. Here and there in South Wales and the West of England
are regions-once mysterious and still romantic-which the British Celts
held to be the homes of gods or outposts of the Other World. In Ireland,
not only is there scarcely a place that is not connected in some way
with the traditionary exploits of the "Red Branch Champions", or of Finn
and his mighty men, but the old deities are still remembered, dwarfed
into fairies, but keeping the same attributes and the same names as of
yore. Wordsworth's complaint[3] that, while Pelion and Ossa, Olympus and
Parnassus are "in immortal books enrolled", not one English mountain,
"though round our sea-girt shore they rise in crowds", had been "by the
Celestial Muses glorified" doubtless seemed true to his own generation.
Thanks to the scholars who have unveiled the ancient Gaelic and British
mythologies, it need not be so for ours. On Ludgate Hill, as well as on
many less famous eminences, once stood the temple of the British Zeus. A
mountain not far from Bettws-y-Coed was the British Olympus, the court
and palace of our ancient gods.

It may well be doubted, however, whether Wordsworth's contemporaries
would have welcomed the mythology which was their own by right of birth
as a substitute for that of Greece and Rome. The inspiration of classic
culture, which Wordsworth was one of the first to break with, was still
powerful. How some of its professors would have held their sides and
roared at the very notion of a British mythology! Yet, all the time, it
had long been secretly leavening English ideas and ideals, none the less
potently because disguised under forms which could be readily
appreciated. Popular fancy had rehabilitated the old gods, long banned
by the priests' bell, book, and candle, under various disguises. They
still lived on in legend as kings of ancient Britain reigning in a
fabulous past anterior to Julius Caesar-such were King Lud, founder of
London; King Lear, whose legend was immortalized by Shakespeare; King
Brennius, who conquered Rome; as well as many others who will be found
filling parts in old drama. They still lived on as long-dead saints of
the early churches of Ireland and Britain, whose wonderful attributes
and adventures are, in many cases, only those of their original
namesakes, the old gods, told afresh. And they still lived on in
another, and a yet more potent, way. Myths of Arthur and his cycle of
gods passed into the hands of the Norman story-tellers, to reappear as
romances of King Arthur and his Knights of the Table Round. Thus spread
over civilized Europe, their influence was immense. Their primal poetic
impulse is still resonant in our literature; we need only instance
Tennyson and Swinburne as minds that have come under its sway.

This diverse influence of Celtic mythology upon English poetry and
romance has been eloquently set forth by Mr. Elton in his _Origins of
English History_. "The religion of the British tribes", he writes, "has
exercised an important influence upon literature. The medival romances
and the legends which stood for history are full of the fair
humanities' and figures of its bright mythology. The elemental powers of
earth and fire, and the spirits which haunted the waves and streams
appear again as kings in the Irish Annals, or as saints and hermits in
Wales. The Knights of the Round Table, Sir Kay and Tristrem and the bold
Sir Bedivere, betray their mighty origin by the attributes they retained
as heroes of romance. It was a goddess, _Dea quaedam phantastica_', who
bore the wounded Arthur to the peaceful valley. There was little
sunlight on its woods and streams, and the nights were dark and gloomy
for want of the moon and stars.' This is the country of Oberon and of
Sir Huon of Bordeaux. It is the dreamy forest of Arden. In an older
mythology, it was the realm of a King of Shadows, the country of Gwyn ap
Nudd, who rode as Sir Guyon in the Fairie Queene'-

           And knighthood took of good Sir Huon's hand,
            When with King Oberon he came to Fairyland'."[4]

To trace Welsh and Irish kings and saints and hermits back to "the
elemental powers of earth and fire, and the spirits that haunted the
woods and streams" of Celtic imagination, and to disclose primitive
pagan deities under the medival and Christian trappings of "King
Arthur's Knights" will necessarily fall within the scope of this volume.
But meanwhile the reader will probably be asking what evidence there is
that apocryphal British kings like Lear and Lud, and questionable Irish
saints like Bridget are really disguised Celtic divinities, or that the
Morte D'Arthur, with its love of Launcelot and the queen, and its quest
of the Holy Grail, was ever anything more than an invention of the
Norman romance-writers. He will demand to know what facts we really
possess about this supposed Celtic mythology alleged to have furnished
their prototypes, and of what real antiquity and value are our
authorities upon it.

The answer to his question will be found in the next chapter.

-----

Footnote 1:

  "There is good ground to believe", writes Mr. E. W. B. Nicholson,
  M.A., the librarian of the Bodleian Library, in the preface to his
  recently-published _Keltic Researches_, "that Lancashire, West
  Yorkshire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire,
  Leicestershire, Rutland, Cambridgeshire, Wiltshire, Somerset, and part
  of Sussex, are as Keltic as Perthshire and North Munster; that
  Cheshire, Shropshire, Herefordshire, Monmouthshire, Gloucestershire,
  Devon, Dorset, Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, and Bedfordshire are
  more so-and equal to North Wales and Leinster; while Buckinghamshire
  and Hertfordshire exceed even this degree and are on a level with
  South Wales and Ulster. Cornwall, of course, is more Keltic than any
  other English county, and as much so as Argyll, Inverness-shire, or
  Connaught."

Footnote 2:

  _The Study of Celtic Literature._

Footnote 3:

  In a sonnet written in 1801.

Footnote 4:

  Elton: _Origins of English History_, chap. X.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER II

                  THE SOURCES OF OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE
                            CELTIC MYTHOLOGY


We may begin by asserting with confidence that Mr. Elton has touched
upon a part only of the material on which we may draw, to reconstruct
the ancient British mythology. Luckily, we are not wholly dependent upon
the difficult tasks of resolving the fabled deeds of apocryphal Irish
and British kings who reigned earlier than St. Patrick or before Julius
Caesar into their original form of Celtic myths, of sifting the
attributes and miracles of doubtfully historical saints, or of
separating the primitive pagan elements in the legends of Arthur and his
Knights from the embellishments added by the romance-writers. We have,
in addition to these-which we may for the present put upon one side as
secondary-sources, a mass of genuine early writings which, though
post-Christian in the form in which they now exist, none the less
descend from the preceding pagan age. These are contained in vellum and
parchment manuscripts long preserved from destruction in mansions and
monasteries in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, and only during the last
century brought to light, copied, and translated by the patient labours
of scholars who have grappled with the long-obsolete dialects in which
they were transcribed.

Many of these volumes are curious miscellanies. Usually the one book of
a great house or monastic community, everything was copied into it that
the scholar of the family or brotherhood thought to be best worth
preserving. Hence they contain matter of the most diverse kind. There
are translations of portions of the Bible and of the classics, and of
such then popular books as Geoffrey of Monmouth's and Nennius' Histories
of Britain; lives of famous saints, together with works attributed to
them; poems and romances of which, under a thin disguise, the old Gaelic
and British gods are the heroes; together with treatises on all the
subjects then studied-grammar, prosody, law, history, geography,
chronology, and the genealogies of important chiefs.

The majority of these documents were put together during a period which,
roughly speaking, lasted from the beginning of the twelfth century to
the end of the sixteenth. In Ireland, in Wales, and, apparently, also in
Scotland, it was a time of literary revival after the turmoils of the
previous epoch. In Ireland, the Norsemen, after long ravaging, had
settled peacefully down, while in Wales, the Norman Conquest had
rendered the country for the first time comparatively quiet. The
scattered remains of history, lay and ecclesiastical, of science, and of
legend were gathered together.

Of the Irish manuscripts, the earliest, and, for our purposes, the most
important, on account of the great store of ancient Gaelic mythology
which, in spite of its dilapidated condition, it still contains, is in
the possession of the Royal Irish Academy. Unluckily, it is reduced to a
fragment of one hundred and thirty-eight pages, but this remnant
preserves a large number of romances relating to the old gods and heroes
of Ireland. Among other things, it contains a complete account of the
epical saga called the _Tin B Chuailgn_, the "Raiding of the Cattle
of Cooley", in which the hero, Cuchulainn, performed his greatest feats.
This manuscript is called the Book of the Dun Cow, from the tradition
that it was copied from an earlier book written upon the skin of a
favourite animal belonging to Saint Ciaran, who lived in the seventh
century. An entry upon one of its pages reveals the name of its scribe,
one Maelmuiri, whom we know to have been killed by robbers in the church
of Clonmacnois in the year 1106.

Far more voluminous, and but little less ancient, is the Book of
Leinster, said to have been compiled in the early part of the twelfth
century by Finn mac Gorman, Bishop of Kildare. This also contains an
account of Cuchulainn's mighty deeds which supplements the older version
in the Book of the Dun Cow. Of somewhat less importance from the point
of view of the student of Gaelic mythology come the Book of Ballymote
and the Yellow Book of Lecan, belonging to the end of the fourteenth
century, and the Books of Lecan and of Lismore, both attributed to the
fifteenth. Besides these six great collections, there survive many other
manuscripts which also contain ancient mythical lore. In one of these,
dating from the fifteenth century, is to be found the story of the
Battle of Moytura, fought between the gods of Ireland and their enemies,
the Fomors, or demons of the deep sea.

The Scottish manuscripts, preserved in the Advocates' Library at
Edinburgh, date back in some cases as far as the fourteenth century,
though the majority of them belong to the fifteenth and sixteenth. They
corroborate the Irish documents, add to the Cuchulainn saga, and make a
more special subject of the other heroic cycle, that which relates the
not less wonderful deeds of Finn, Ossian, and the Fenians. They also
contain stories of other characters, who, more ancient than either Finn
or Cuchulainn, are the Tuatha D Danann, the god-tribe of the ancient
Gaels.

The Welsh documents cover about the same period as the Irish and the
Scottish. Four of these stand out from the rest, as most important. The
oldest is the Black Book of Caermarthen, which dates from the third
quarter of the twelfth century; the Book of Aneurin, which was written
late in the thirteenth; the Book of Taliesin, assigned to the
fourteenth; and the Red Book of Hergest, compiled by various persons
during that century and the one following it. The first three of these
"Four Ancient Books of Wales" are small in size, and contain poems
attributed to the great traditional bards of the sixth century, Myrddin,
Taliesin, and Aneurin. The last-the Red Book of Hergest-is far larger.
In it are to be found Welsh translations of the British Chronicles; the
oft-mentioned Triads, verses celebrating famous traditionary persons or
things; ancient poems attributed to Llywarch Hn; and, of priceless
value to any study of our subject, the so-called Mabinogion, stories in
which large portions of the old British mythology are worked up into
romantic form.

The whole bulk, therefore, of the native literature bearing upon the
mythology of the British Islands may be attributed to a period which
lasted from the beginning of the twelfth century to the end of the
sixteenth. But even the commencement of this era will no doubt seem far
too late a day to allow authenticity to matter which ought to have
vastly preceded it. The date, however, merely marks the final redaction
of the contents of the manuscripts into the form in which they now
exist, without bearing at all upon the time of their authorship.
Avowedly copies of ancient poems and tales from much older manuscripts,
the present books no more fix the period of the original composition of
their contents than the presence of a portion of the _Canterbury Tales_
in a modern anthology of English poetry would assign Chaucer to the
present year of grace.

This may be proved both directly and inferentially.[5] In some
instances-as in that of an elegy upon Saint Columba in the Book of the
Dun Cow-the dates of authorship are actually given. In others, we may
depend upon evidence which, if not quite so absolute, is nearly as
convincing. Even where the writer does not state that he is copying from
older manuscripts, it is obvious that this must have been the case, from
the glosses in his version. The scribes of the earlier Gaelic
manuscripts very often found, in the documents from which they
themselves were copying, words so archaic as to be unintelligible to the
readers of their own period. To render them comprehensible, they were
obliged to insert marginal notes which explained these obsolete words by
reference to other manuscripts more ancient still. Often the medival
copyists have ignorantly moved these notes from the margin into the
text, where they remain, like philological fossils, to give evidence of
previous forms of life. The documents from which they were taken have
perished, leaving the medival copies as their sole record. In the Welsh
Mabinogion the same process is apparent. Peculiarities in the existing
manuscripts show plainly enough that they must have been copied from
some more archaic text. Besides this, they are, as they at present
stand, obviously made up of earlier tales pieced together. Almost as
clearly as the Gaelic manuscripts, the Welsh point us back to older and
more primitive forms.

The ancient legends of the Gael and the Briton are thus shown to have
been no mere inventions of scholarly monks in the Middle Ages. We have
now to trace, if possible, the date, not necessarily of their first
appearance on men's lips, but of their first redaction into writing in
approximately the form in which we have them now.

Circumstantial evidence can be adduced to prove that the most important
portions both of Gaelic and British early literature can be safely
relegated to a period of several centuries prior to their now-existing
record. Our earliest version of the episode of the _Tin B Chuailgn_,
which is the nucleus and centre of the ancient Gaelic heroic cycle of
which Cuchulainn, _fortissimus heros Scotorum_, is the principal figure,
is found in the twelfth-century Book of the Dun Cow. But legend tells us
that at the beginning of the seventh century the Saga had not only been
composed, but had actually become so obsolete as to have been forgotten
by the bards. Their leader, one Senchan Torpeist, a historical
character, and chief bard of Ireland at that time, obtained permission
from the Saints to call Fergus, Cuchulainn's contemporary, and a chief
actor in the "Raid", from the dead, and received from the resurrected
hero a true and full version. This tradition, dealing with a real
personage, surely shows that the story of the _Tin_ was known before
the time of Senchan, and probably preserves the fact, either that his
version of Cuchulainn's famous deeds became the accepted one, or that he
was the first to reduce it to writing. An equally suggestive
consideration approximately fixes for us the earliest redaction of the
Welsh mythological prose tales called the "Mabinogion", or, more
correctly speaking, the "Four Branches of the Mabinogi".[6] In none of
these is there the slightest mention, or apparently the least knowledge,
of Arthur, around whom and whose supposed contemporaries centres the
mass of British legend as it was transmitted by the Welsh to the
Normans. These mysterious mythological records must in all probability,
therefore, antedate the Arthurian cycle of myth, which was already being
put into form in the sixth century. On the other hand, the characters of
the "Four Branches" are mentioned without comment-as though they were
personages with whom no one could fail to be familiar-in the supposed
sixth-century poems contained in those "Four Ancient Books of Wales" in
which are found the first meagre references to the British hero.

Such considerations as these throw back, with reasonable certainty, the
existence of the Irish and Welsh poems and prose tales, in something
like their present shape, to a period antedating the seventh century.

But this, again, means only that the myths, traditions, and legends were
current at that to us early, but to them, in their actual substance,
late date, in literary form. A mythology must always be far older than
the oldest verses and stories that celebrate it. Elaborate poems and
sagas are not made in a day, or in a year. The legends of the Gaelic and
British gods and heroes could not have sprung, like Athena from the head
of Zeus, full-born out of some poet's brain. The bard who first put them
into artistic shape was setting down the primitive traditions of his
race. We may therefore venture to describe them as not of the twelfth
century or of the seventh, but as of a prehistoric and immemorial
antiquity.

Internal evidence bears this out. An examination of both the Gaelic and
British legendary romances shows, under embellishing details added by
later hands, an inner core of primeval thought which brings them into
line with the similar ideas of other races in the earliest stage of
culture. Their "local colour" may be that of their last "editor", but
their "plots" are pre-medival, pre-Christian, pre-historic. The
characters of early Gaelic legend belong to the same stamp of
imagination that created Olympian and Titan, sir and Jtun. We must go
far to the back of civilized thought to find parallels to such a story
as that in which the British sun-god, struck by a rival in love with a
poisoned spear, is turned into an eagle, from whose wound great pieces
of carrion are continually failing.[7]

This aspect of the Celtic literary records was clearly seen, and
eloquently expressed, by Matthew Arnold in his _Study of Celtic
Literature_.[8] He was referring to the Welsh side, but his image holds
good equally for the Gaelic. "The first thing that strikes one", he
says, "in reading the _Mabinogion_ is how evidently the medival
story-teller is pillaging an antiquity of which he does not fully
possess the secret: he is like a peasant building his hut on the site of
Halicarnassus or Ephesus; he builds, but what he builds is full of
materials of which he knows not the history, or knows by a glimmering
tradition merely: stones not of this building', but of an older
architecture, greater, cunninger, more majestical." His heroes "are no
medival personages: they belong to an older, pagan, mythological
world". So, too, with the figures, however euhemerized, of the three
great Gaelic cycles: that of the Tuatha D Danann, of the Heroes of
Ulster, of Finn and the Fenians. Their divinity outshines their
humanity; through their masks may be seen the faces of gods.

Yet, gods as they are, they had taken on the semblance of mortality by
the time their histories were fixed in the form in which we have them
now. Their earliest records, if those could be restored to us, would
doubtless show them eternal and undying, changing their shapes at will,
but not passing away. But the post-Christian copyists, whether Irish or
Welsh, would not countenance this. Hence we have the singular paradox of
the deaths of Immortals. There is hardly one of the figures of either
the Gaelic or the British Pantheon whose demise is not somewhere
recorded. Usually they fell in the unceasing battles between the
divinities of darkness and of light. Their deaths in earlier cycles of
myth, however, do not preclude their appearance in later ones. Only,
indeed, with the closing of the lips of the last mortal who preserved
his tradition can the life of a god be truly said to end.

-----

Footnote 5:

  Satisfactory summaries of the evidence for the dates of both the
  Gaelic and Welsh legendary material will be found in pamphlets No. 8
  and 11 of Mr. Nutt's _Popular Studies in Mythology, Romance, and
  Folklore_.

Footnote 6:

  Rhys: _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_, chap. I.

Footnote 7:

  See chap. XVI of this book-"The Gods of the Britons".

Footnote 8:

  Lecture II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER III

                    WHO WERE THE "ANCIENT BRITONS"?


But, before proceeding to recount the myths of the "Ancient Britons", it
will be well to decide what people, exactly, we mean by that loose but
convenient phrase. We have, all of us, vague ideas of Ancient Britons,
recollected, doubtless, from our school-books. There we saw their
pictures as, painted with woad, they paddled coracles, or drove scythed
chariots through legions of astonished Romans. Their Druids,
white-bearded and wearing long, white robes, cut the mistletoe with a
golden sickle at the time of the full moon, or, less innocently
employed, made bonfires of human beings shut up in gigantic figures of
wicker-work.

Such picturesque details were little short of the sum-total, not only of
our own knowledge of the subject, but also of that of our teachers.
Practically all their information concerning the ancient inhabitants of
Britain was taken from the Commentaries of Julius Caesar. So far as it
went, it was no doubt correct; but it did not go far. Caesar's interest
in our British ancestors was that of a general who was his own
war-correspondent rather than that of an exhaustive and painstaking
scientist. It has been reserved for modern archologists, philologists,
and ethnologists to give us a fuller account of the Ancient Britons.

The inhabitants of our islands previous to the Roman invasion are
generally described as "Celts". But they must have been largely a mixed
race; and the people with whom they mingled must have modified to
some-and perhaps to a large-extent their physique, their customs, and
their language.

Speculation has run somewhat wild over the question of the composition
of the Early Britons. But out of the clash of rival theories there
emerges one-and one only-which may be considered as scientifically
established. We have certain proof of two distinct human stocks in the
British Islands at the time of the Roman Conquest; and so great an
authority as Professor Huxley has given his opinion that there is no
evidence of any others.[9]

The earliest of these two races would seem to have inhabited our islands
from the most ancient times, and may, for our purpose, be described as
aboriginal. It was the people that built the "long barrows"; and which
is variously called by ethnologists the Iberian, Mediterranean, Berber,
Basque, Silurian, or Euskarian race. In physique it was short, swarthy,
dark-haired, dark-eyed, and long-skulled; its language belonged to the
class called "Hamitic", the surviving types of which are found among the
Gallas, Abyssinians, Berbers, and other North African tribes; and it
seems to have come originally from some part either of Eastern,
Northern, or Central Africa. Spreading thence, it was probably the first
people to inhabit the Valley of the Nile, and it sent offshoots into
Syria and Asia Minor. The earliest Hellenes found it in Greece under the
name of "Pelasgoi"; the earliest Latins in Italy, as the "Etruscans";
and the Hebrews in Palestine, as the "Hittites". It spread northward
through Europe as far as the Baltic, and westward, along the Atlas
chain, to Spain, France, and our own islands.[10] In many countries it
reached a comparatively high level of civilization, but in Britain its
development must have been early checked. We can discern it as an
agricultural rather than a pastoral people, still in the Stone Age,
dwelling in totemistic tribes on hills whose summits it fortified
elaborately, and whose slopes it cultivated on what is called the
"terrace system", and having a primitive culture which ethnologists
think to have much resembled that of the present hill-tribes of Southern
India.[11] It held our islands till the coming of the Celts, who fought
with the aborigines, dispossessed them of the more fertile parts,
subjugated them, even amalgamated with them, but certainly never
extirpated them. In the time of the Romans they were still practically
independent in South Wales. In Ireland they were long unconquered, and
are found as allies rather than serfs of the Gaels, ruling their own
provinces, and preserving their own customs and religion. Nor, in spite
of all the successive invasions of Great Britain and Ireland, are they
yet extinct, or so merged as to have lost their type, which is still the
predominant one in many parts of the west both of Britain and Ireland,
and is believed by some ethnologists to be generally upon the increase
all over England.

The second of the two races was the exact opposite to the first. It was
the tall, fair, light-haired, blue- or gray-eyed, broad-headed people
called, popularly, the "Celts", who belonged in speech to the "Aryan"
family, their language finding its affinities in Latin, Greek, Teutonic,
Slavic, the Zend of Ancient Persia, and the Sanscrit of Ancient India.
Its original home was probably somewhere in Central Europe, along the
course of the upper Danube, or in the region of the Alps. The "round
barrows" in which it buried its dead, or deposited their burnt ashes,
differ in shape from the "long barrows" of the earlier race. It was in a
higher stage of culture than the "Iberians", and introduced into Britain
bronze and silver, and, perhaps, some of the more lately domesticated
animals.

Both Iberians and Celts were divided into numerous tribes, but there is
nothing to show that there was any great diversity among the former. It
is otherwise with the Celts, who were separated into two main branches
which came over at different times. The earliest were the Goidels, or
Gaels; the second, the Brythons, or Britons. Between these two branches
there was not only a dialectical, but probably, also, a considerable
physical difference. Some anthropologists even postulate a different
shape of skull. Without necessarily admitting this, there is reason to
suppose a difference of build and of colour of hair. With regard to
this, we have the evidence of Latin writers-of Tacitus,[12] who tells us
that the "Caledonians" of the North differed from the Southern Britons
in being larger-limbed and redder-haired, and of Strabo,[13] who
described the tribes in the interior of Britain as taller than the
Gaulish colonists on the coast, with hair less yellow and limbs more
loosely knit. Equally do the classic authorities agree in recognizing
the "Silures" of South Wales as an entirely different race from any
other in Britain. The dark complexions and curly hair of these Iberians
seemed to Tacitus to prove them immigrants from Spain.[14]

Professor Rhys also puts forward evidence to show that the Goidels and
the Brythons had already separated before they first left Gaul for our
islands.[15] He finds them as two distinct peoples there. We do not
expect so much nowadays from "the merest school-boy" as we did in
Macaulay's time, but even the modern descendant of that paragon could
probably tell us that all Gaul was divided into three parts, one of
which was inhabited by the Belgae, another by the Aquitani, and the
third by those who called themselves Celtae, but were termed Galli by
the Romans; and that they all differed from one another in language,
customs, and laws.[16] Of these, Professor Rhys identifies the Belgae
with the Brythons, and the Celtae with the Goidels, the third people,
the Aquitani, being non-Celtic and non-Aryan, part of the great
Hamitic-speaking Iberian stock.[17] The Celtae, with their Goidelic
dialect of Celtic, which survives to-day in the Gaelic languages of
Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man, were the first to come over to
Britain, pushed forward, probably, by the Belgae, who, Caesar tells us,
were the bravest of the Gauls.[18] Here they conquered the native
Iberians, driving them out of the fertile parts into the rugged
districts of the north and west. Later came the Belgae themselves,
compelled by press of population; and they, bringing better weapons and
a higher civilization, treated the Goidels as those had treated the
Iberians. Thus harried, the Goidels probably combined with the Iberians
against what was now the common foe, and became to a large degree
amalgamated with them. The result was that during the Roman domination
the British Islands were roughly divided with regard to race as follows:
The Brythons, or second Celtic race, held all Britain south of the
Tweed, with the exception of the extreme west, while the first Celtic
race, the Goidelic, had most of Ireland, as well as the Isle of Man,
Cumberland, the West Highlands, Cornwall, Devon, and North Wales. North
of the Grampians lived the Picts, who were probably more or less
Goidelicized Iberians, the aboriginal race also holding out, unmixed, in
South Wales and parts of Ireland.

It is now time to decide what, for the purposes of this book, it will be
best to call the two different branches of the Celts, and their
languages. With such familiar terms as "Gael" and "Briton", "Gaelic" and
"British", ready to our hands, it seems pedantic to insist upon the more
technical "Goidel" and "Brython", "Goidelic" and "Brythonic". The
difficulty is that the words "Gael" and "Gaelic" have been so long
popularly used to designate only the modern "Goidels" of Scotland and
their language, that they may create confusion when also applied to the
people and languages of Ireland and the Isle of Man. Similarly, the
words "Briton" and "British" have come to mean, at the present day, the
people of the whole of the British Islands, though they at first only
signified the inhabitants of England, Central Wales, the Lowlands of
Scotland, and the Brythonic colony in Brittany. However, the words
"Goidel" and "Brython", with their derivatives, are so clumsy that it
will probably prove best to use the neater terms. In this volume,
therefore, the "Goidels" of Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man are
our "Gaels" and the "Brythons" of England and Wales are our "Britons".

We get the earliest accounts of the life of the inhabitants of the
British Islands from two sources. The first is a foreign one, that of
the Latin writers. But the Romans only really knew the Southern Britons,
whom they describe as similar in physique and customs to the Continental
Gauls, with whom, indeed, they considered them to be identical.[19] At
the time they wrote, colonies of Belgae were still settling upon the
coasts of Britain opposite to Gaul.[20] Roman information grew scantier
as it approached the Wall, and of the Northern tribes they seem to have
had only such knowledge as they gathered through occasional warfare with
them. They describe them as entirely barbarous, naked and tattooed,
living by the chase alone, without towns, houses, or fields, without
government or family life, and regarding iron as an ornament of value,
as other, more civilized peoples regarded gold.[21] As for Ireland, it
never came under their direct observation, and we are entirely dependent
upon its native writers for information as to the manners and customs of
the Gaels. It may be considered convincing proof of the authenticity of
the descriptions of life contained in the ancient Gaelic manuscripts
that they corroborate so completely the observations of the Latin
writers upon the Britons and Gauls. Reading the two side by side, we may
largely reconstruct the common civilization of the Celts.

Roughly speaking, one may compare it with the civilization of the
Greeks, as described by Homer.[22] Both peoples were in the tribal and
pastoral stage of culture, in which the chiefs are the great
cattle-owners round whom their less wealthy fellows gather. Both wear
much the same attire, use the same kind of weapons, and fight in the
same manner-from the war-chariot, a vehicle already obsolete even in
Ireland by the first century of the Christian era. Battles are fought
single-handed between chiefs, the ill-armed common people contributing
little to their result, and less to their history. Such chiefs are said
to be divinely descended-sons, even, of the immortal gods. Their
tremendous feats are sung by the bards, who, like the Homeric poets,
were privileged persons, inferior only to the war-lord. Ancient Greek
and Ancient Celt had very much the same conceptions of life, both as
regards this world and the next.

We may gather much detailed information of the early inhabitants of the
British Islands from our various authorities.[23] Their clothes, which
consisted, according to the Latin writers, of a blouse with sleeves,
trousers fitting closely round the ankles, and a shawl or cloak,
fastened at the shoulder with a brooch, were made either of thick felt
or of woven cloth dyed with various brilliant colours. The writer
Diodorus tells us that they were crossed with little squares and lines,
"as though they had been sprinkled with flowers". They were, in fact,
like "tartans", and we may believe Varro, who tells us that they "made a
gaudy show". The men alone seem to have worn hats, which were of soft
felt, the women's hair being uncovered, and tied in a knot behind. In
time of battle, the men also dispensed with any head-covering, brushing
their abundant hair forward into a thick mass, and dyeing it red with a
soap made of goat's fat and beech ashes, until they looked (says
Cicero's tutor Posidonius, who visited Britain about 110 B.C.) less like
human beings than wild men of the woods. Both sexes were fond of
ornaments, which took the form of gold bracelets, rings, pins, and
brooches, and of beads of amber, glass, and jet. Their knives, daggers,
spear-heads, axes, and swords were made of bronze or iron; their shields
were the same round target used by the Highlanders at the battle of
Culloden; and they seem also to have had a kind of lasso to which a
hammer-shaped ball was attached, and which they used as the Gauchos of
South America use their _bola_. Their war-chariots were made of wicker,
the wooden wheels being armed with sickles of bronze. These were drawn
either by two or four horses, and were large enough to hold several
persons in each. Standing in these, they rushed along the enemy's lines,
hurling darts, and driving the scythes against all who came within
reach. The Romans were much impressed by the skill of the drivers, who
"could check their horses at full speed on a steep incline, and turn
them in an instant, and could run along the pole, and stand on the yoke,
and then get back into their chariots again without a moment's
delay".[24]

With these accounts of the Roman writers we may compare the picture of
the Gaelic hero, Cuchulainn, as the ancient Irish writers describe him
dressed and armed for battle. Glorified by the bard, he yet wears
essentially the same costume and equipment which the classic historians
and geographers described more soberly. "His gorgeous raiment that he
wore in great conventions" consisted of "a fair crimson tunic of five
plies and fringed, with a long pin of white silver, gold-enchased and
patterned, shining as if it had been a luminous torch which for its
blazing property and brilliance men might not endure to see. Next his
skin, a body-vest of silk, bordered and fringed all round with gold,
with silver, and with white bronze, which vest came as far as the upper
edge of his russet-coloured kilt.... About his neck were a hundred
linklets of red gold that flashed again, with pendants hanging from
them. His head-gear was adorned with a hundred mixed carbuncle jewels,
strung." He carried "a trusty special shield, in hue dark crimson, and
in its circumference armed with a pure white silver rim. At his left
side a long and golden-hilted sword. Beside him, in the chariot, a
lengthy spear; together with a keen, aggression-boding javelin, fitted
with hurling thong, with rivets of white bronze."[25] Another passage of
Gaelic saga describes his chariot. It was made of fine wood, with
wicker-work, moving on wheels of white bronze. It had a high rounded
frame of creaking copper, a strong curved yoke of gold, and a pole of
white silver, with mountings of white bronze. The yellow reins were
plaited, and the shafts were as hard and straight as sword-blades.[26]

In like manner the ancient Irish writers have made glorious the halls
and fortresses of their mythical kings. Like the palaces of Priam, of
Menelaus, and of Odysseus, they gleam with gold and gems. Conchobar,[27]
the legendary King of Ulster in its golden age, had three such "houses"
at Emain Macha. Of the one called the "Red Branch", we are told that it
contained nine compartments of red yew, partitioned by walls of bronze,
all grouped around the king's private chamber, which had a ceiling of
silver, and bronze pillars adorned with gold and carbuncles.[28] But the
far less magnificent accounts of the Latin writers have, no doubt, more
truth in them than such lavish pictures. They described the Britons they
knew as living in villages of bee-hive huts, roofed with fern or thatch,
from which, at the approach of an enemy, they retired to the local
_dn_. This, so far from being elaborate, merely consisted of a round or
oval space fenced in with palisades and earthworks, and situated either
upon the top of a hill or in the midst of a not easily traversable
morass.[29] We may see the remains of such strongholds in many parts of
England-notable ones are the "castles" of Amesbury, Avebury, and Old
Sarum in Wiltshire, Saint Catherine's Hill, near Winchester, and Saint
George's Hill, in Surrey-and it is probable that, in spite of the Celtic
praisers of past days, the "palaces" of Emain Macha and of Tara were
very like them.

The Celtic customs were, like the Homeric, those of the primitive world.
All land (though it may have theoretically belonged to the chief) was
cultivated in common. This community of possessions is stated by
Caesar[30] to have extended to their wives; but the imputation cannot be
said to have been proved. On the contrary, in the stories of both
branches of the Celtic race, women seem to have taken a higher place in
men's estimation, and to have enjoyed far more personal liberty, than
among the Homeric Greeks. The idea may have arisen from a
misunderstanding of some of the curious Celtic customs. Descent seems to
have been traced through the maternal rather than through the paternal
line, a very un-Aryan procedure which some believe to have been borrowed
from another race. The parental relation was still further lessened by
the custom of sending children to be brought up outside the family in
which they were born, so that they had foster-parents to whom they were
as much, or even more, attached than to their natural ones.

Their political state, mirroring their family life, was not less
primitive. There was no central tribunal. Disputes were settled within
the families in which they occurred, while, in the case of graver
injuries, the injured party or his nearest relation could kill the
culprit or exact a fine from him. As families increased in number, they
became petty tribes, often at war with one another. A defeated tribe had
to recognize the sovereignty of the head man of the conquering tribe,
and a succession of such victories exalted him into the position of a
chief of his district. But even then, though his decision was the whole
of the law, he was little more than the mouthpiece of public opinion.

-----

Footnote 9:

  Huxley: _On Some Fixed Points in British Ethnology_. 1871.

Footnote 10:

  Sergi: _The Mediterranean Race_.

Footnote 11:

  Gomme: _The Village Community_. Chap. IV-"The non-Aryan Elements in
  the English Village Community".

Footnote 12:

  Tacitus: _Agricola_, chap. XI.

Footnote 13:

  Strabo: _Geographica_, Book IV, chap. V.

Footnote 14:

  Tacitus, _op. cit._

Footnote 15:

  Rhys: _The Early Ethnology of the British Islands_. _Scottish Review._
  April, 1890.

Footnote 16:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book I, chap. I.

Footnote 17:

  Rhys: _Scottish Review_. April, 1890.

Footnote 18:

  Op. Caesar, _op. cit._

Footnote 19:

  Tacitus: _Agricola_, chap. XI.

Footnote 20:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book V, chap. XII.

Footnote 21:

  Elton: _Origins of English History_, chap. VII.

Footnote 22:

  See "_La Civilisation des Celtes et celle de l'pope Homrique_", by
  M. d'Arbois de Jubainville, _Cours de Littrature Celtique_, Vol. VI.

Footnote 23:

  See Elton: _Origins of English History_, chap. VII.

Footnote 24:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book IV, chap. XXXIII.

Footnote 25:

  From the _Tin B Chuailgn_. The translator is Mr. Standish Hayes
  O'Grady.

Footnote 26:

  _Tochmarc Emire_-the _Wooing of Emer_-an old Irish romance.

Footnote 27:

  Sometimes spelt "Conachar", and pronounced _Conhower_ or _Connor_.

Footnote 28:

  The _Wooing of Emer_.

Footnote 29:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book V, chap. XXI, and various passages in
  Book VII.

Footnote 30:

  _Ibid._, chap. XIV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER IV

                THE RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT BRITONS AND
                                DRUIDISM


The ancient inhabitants of Britain-the Gaelic and British Celts-have
been already described as forming a branch of what are roughly called
the "Aryans". This name has, however, little reference to race, and
really signifies the speakers of a group of languages which can be all
shown to be connected, and to descend remotely from a single source-a
hypothetical mother-tongue spoken by a hypothetical people which we term
"Aryan", or, more correctly, "Indo-European". This primeval speech,
evolved, probably, upon some part of the great plain which stretches
from the mountains of Central Europe to the mountains of Central Asia,
has spread, superseding, or amalgamating with the tongues of other
races, until branches of it are spoken over almost the whole of Europe
and a great portion of Asia. All the various Latin, Greek, Slavic,
Teutonic, and Celtic languages are "Aryan", as well as Persian and other
Asiatic dialects derived from the ancient "Zend", and the numerous
Indian languages which trace their origin to Sanscrit.

Not very long ago, it was supposed that this common descent of language
involved a common descent of blood. A real brotherhood was
enthusiastically claimed for all the principal European nations, who
were also invited to recognize Hindus and Persians as their long-lost
cousins. Since then, it has been conceded that, while the Aryan speech
survived, though greatly modified, the Aryan blood might well have
disappeared, diluted beyond recognition by crossing with the other races
whom the Aryans conquered, or among whom they more or less peacefully
settled. As a matter of fact, there are no European nations-perhaps no
people at all except a few remote savage tribes-which are not made up of
the most diverse elements. Aryan and non-Aryan long ago blended
inextricably, to form by their fusion new peoples.

But, just as the Aryan speech influenced the new languages, and the
Aryan customs the new civilizations, so we can still discern in the
religions of the Aryan-speaking nations similar ideas and expressions
pointing to an original source of mythological conceptions. Hence,
whether we investigate the mythology of the Hindus, the Greeks, the
Teutons, or the Celts, we find the same mythological groundwork. In
each, we see the powers of nature personified, and endowed with human
form and attributes, though bearing, with few exceptions, different
names. Like the Vedic brahmans, the Greek and Latin poets, and the Norse
scalds, the Celtic bards-whether Gaels or Britons-imagined the sky, the
sun, the moon, the earth, the sea, and the dark underworld, as well as
the mountains, the streams and the woods, to be ruled by beings like
their own chiefs, but infinitely more powerful; every passion, as War
and Love, and every art, as Poetry and Smithcraft, had its divine
founder, teacher, and exponent; and of all these deities and their
imagined children, they wove the poetical and allegorical romances which
form the subject of the present volume.

Like other nations, too, whether Aryan or non-Aryan, the Celts had,
besides their mythology, a religion. It is not enough to tell tales of
shadowy gods; they must be made visible by sculpture, housed in groves
or temples, served with ritual, and propitiated with sacrifices, if one
is to hope for their favours. Every cult must have its priests living by
the altar.

The priests of the Celts are well-known to us by name as the "Druids"-a
word derived from a root DR which signifies a tree, and especially the
oak, in several Aryan languages.[31] This is generally-though not by all
scholars-taken as proving that they paid an especial veneration to the
king of trees. It is true that the mistletoe-that strange parasite upon
the oak-was prominent among their "herbs of power", and played a part in
their ritual;[32] but this is equally true of other Aryan nations. By
the Norse it was held sacred to the god Balder, while the Romans
believed it to be the "golden bough" that gave access to Hades.[33]

The accounts both of the Latin and Gaelic writers give us a fairly
complete idea of the nature of the Druids, and especially of the high
estimation in which they were held. They were at once the priests, the
physicians, the wizards, the diviners, the theologians, the scientists,
and the historians of their tribes. All spiritual power and all human
knowledge were vested in them, and they ranked second only to the kings
and chiefs. They were freed from all contribution to the State, whether
by tribute or service in war, so that they might the better apply
themselves to their divine offices. Their decisions were absolutely
final, and those who disobeyed them were laid under a terrible
excommunication or "boycott".[34] Classic writers tell us how they
lorded it in Gaul, where, no doubt, they borrowed splendour by imitating
their more civilized neighbours. Men of the highest rank were proud to
cast aside the insignia of mere mortal honour to join the company of
those who claimed to be the direct mediators with the sky-god and the
thunder-god, and who must have resembled the ecclesiastics of medival
Europe in the days of their greatest power, combining, like them,
spiritual and temporal dignities, and possessing the highest culture of
their age. Yet it was not among these Druids of Gaul, with their
splendid temples and vestments and their elaborate rituals, that the
metropolis of Druidism was to be sought. We learn from Caesar that the
Gallic Druids believed their religion to have come to them, originally,
from Britain, and that it was their practice to send their "theological
students" across the Channel to learn its doctrines at their purest
source.[35] To trace a cult backwards is often to take a retrograde
course in culture, and it was no doubt in Britain-which Pliny the Elder
tells us "might have taught magic to Persia"[36]-that the sufficiently
primitive and savage rites of the Druids of Gaul were preserved in their
still more savage and primitive forms. It is curious corroboration of
this alleged British origin of Druidism that the ancient Irish also
believed their Druidism to have come from the sister island. Their
heroes and seers are described as only gaining the highest knowledge by
travelling to Alba.[37] However this may be, we may take it as certain
that this Druidism was the accepted religion of the Celtic race.

Certain scholars look deeper for its origin, holding its dark
superstitions and savage rites to bear the stamp of lower minds than
those of the poetic and manly Celts. Professor Rhys inclines to see
three forms of religion in the British Islands at the time of the Roman
invasion: the "Druidism" of the Iberian aborigines; the pure polytheism
of the Brythons, who, having come later into the country, had mixed but
little with the natives; and the mingled Aryan and non-Aryan cults of
the Goidels, who were already largely amalgamated with them.[38] But
many authorities dissent from this view, and, indeed, we are not obliged
to postulate borrowing from tribes in a lower state of culture, to
explain primitive and savage features underlying a higher religion. The
"Aryan" nations must have passed, equally with all others, through a
state of pure savagery; and we know that the religion of the Greeks, in
many respects so lofty, sheltered features and legends as barbarous as
any that can be attributed to the Celts.[39]

Of the famous teaching of the Druids we know little, owing to their
habit of never allowing their doctrines to be put into writing. Caesar,
however, roughly records its scope. "As one of their leading dogmas", he
says, "they inculcate this: that souls are not annihilated, but pass
after death from one body to another, and they hold that by this
teaching men are much encouraged to valour, through disregarding the
fear of death. They also discuss and impart to the young many things
concerning the heavenly bodies and their movements, the size of the
world and of our earth, natural science, and of the influence and power
of the immortal gods."[40] The Romans seem to have held their wisdom in
some awe, though it is not unlikely that the Druids themselves borrowed
whatever knowledge they may have had of science and philosophy from the
classical culture. That their creed of transmigration was not, however,
merely taken over from the Greeks seems certain from its appearance in
the ancient Gaelic myths. Not only the "shape-shifting" common to the
magic stories of all nations, but actual reincarnation was in the power
of privileged beings. The hero Cuchulainn was urged by the men of Ulster
to marry, because they knew "that his rebirth would be of himself",[41]
and they did not wish so great a warrior to be lost to their tribe.
Another legend tells how the famous Finn mac Coul was reborn, after two
hundred years, as an Ulster king called Mongan.[42]

Such ideas, however, belonged to the metaphysical side of Druidism. Far
more important to the practical primitive mind are ritual and sacrifice,
by the due performance of which the gods are persuaded or compelled to
grant earth's increase and length of days to men. Among the Druids, this
humouring of the divinities took the shape of human sacrifice, and that
upon a scale which would seem to have been unsurpassed in horror even by
the most savage tribes of West Africa or Polynesia. "The whole Gaulish
nation", says Caesar, "is to a great degree devoted to superstitious
rites; and on this account those who are afflicted with severe diseases,
or who are engaged in battles and dangers, either sacrifice human beings
for victims, or vow that they will immolate themselves, and these employ
the Druids as ministers for such sacrifices, because they think that,
unless the life of man be repaid for the life of man, the will of the
immortal gods cannot be appeased. They also ordain national offerings of
the same kind. Others make wicker-work images of vast size, the limbs of
which they fill with living men and set on fire."[43]

We find evidence of similarly awful customs in pagan Ireland. Among the
oldest Gaelic records are tracts called _Dinnsenchus_, in which famous
places are enumerated, together with the legends relating to them. Such
topographies are found in several of the great Irish medival
manuscripts, and therefore, of course, received their final
transcription at the hands of Christian monks. But these ecclesiastics
rarely tampered with compositions in elaborate verse. Nor can it be
imagined that any monastic scribe could have invented such a legend as
this one which describes the practice of human sacrifice among the
ancient Irish. The poem (which is found in the Books of Leinster, of
Ballymote, of Lecan, and in a document called the Rennes MS.)[44]
records the reason why a spot near the present village of Ballymagauran,
in County Cavan, received the name of Mag Slecht, the "Plain of
Adoration".

        "Here used to be
         A high idol with many fights,
         Which was named the Cromm Cruaich;
         It made every tribe to be without peace.

        "'Twas a sad evil!
         Brave Gaels used to worship it.
         From it they would not without tribute ask
         To be satisfied as to their portion of the hard world.

        "He was their god,
         The withered Cromm with many mists,
         The people whom he shook over every host,
         The everlasting kingdom they shall not have.

        "To him without glory
         They would kill their piteous, wretched offspring
         With much wailing and peril,
         To pour their blood around Cromm Cruaich.

        "Milk and corn
         They would ask from him speedily
         In return for one-third of their healthy issue:
         Great was the horror and the scare of him.

        "To him
         Noble Gaels would prostrate themselves,
         From the worship of him, with many manslaughters,
         The plain is called "Mag Slecht".

            *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

        "They did evil,
         They beat their palms, they pounded their bodies,
         Wailing to the demon who enslaved them,
         They shed falling showers of tears.

            *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

        "Around Cromm Cruaich
         There the hosts would prostrate themselves;
         Though he put them under deadly disgrace,
         Their name clings to the noble plain.

        "In their ranks (stood)
         Four times three stone idols;
         To bitterly beguile the hosts,
         The figure of the Cromm was made of gold.

        "Since the rule
         Of Herimon[45], the noble man of grace,
         There was worshipping of stones
         Until the coming of good Patrick of Macha.

        "A sledge-hammer to the Cromm
         He applied from crown to sole,
         He destroyed without lack of valour
         The feeble idol which was there."

Such, we gather from a tradition which we may deem authentic, was human
sacrifice in early Ireland. According to the quoted verse, one third of
the healthy children were slaughtered, presumably every year, to wrest
from the powers of nature the grain and grass upon which the tribes and
their cattle subsisted. In a prose _dinnsenchus_ preserved in the Rennes
MS.,[46] there is a slight variant. "'Tis there", (at Mag Slecht), it
runs, "was the king idol of Erin, namely the Crom Croich, and around him
were twelve idols made of stones, but he was of gold. Until Patrick's
advent he was the god of every folk that colonized Ireland. To him they
used to offer the firstlings of every issue and the chief scions of
every clan." The same authority also tells us that these sacrifices were
made at "Hallowe'en", which took the place, in the Christian calendar,
of the heathen _Samhain_-"Summer's End"-when the sun's power waned, and
the strength of the gods of darkness, winter, and the underworld grew
great.

Who, then, was this bloodthirsty deity? His name, _Cromm Cruaich_, means
the "Bowed One of the Mound", and was evidently applied to him only
after his fall from godhead. It relates to the tradition that, at the
approach of the all-conquering Saint Patrick, the "demon" fled from his
golden image, which thereupon sank forward in the earth in homage to the
power that had come to supersede it.[47] But from another source we
glean that the word _cromm_ was a kind of pun upon _cenn_, and that the
real title of the "king idol of Erin" was _Cenn Cruaich_, "Head" or
"Lord" of the Mound. Professor Rhys, in his _Celtic Heathendom_,[48]
suggests that he was probably the Gaelic heaven-god, worshipped, like
the Hellenic Zeus, upon "high places", natural or artificial. At any
rate, we may see in him the god most revered by the Gaels, surrounded by
the other twelve chief members of their Pantheon.

It would appear probable that the Celtic State worship was what is
called "solar". All its chief festivals related to points in the sun's
progress, the equinoxes having been considered more important than the
solstices. It was at the spring equinox (called by the Celts
"Beltaine"[49]) in every nineteenth year that, we learn from Diodorus
the Sicilian, a writer contemporary with Julius Caesar, Apollo himself
appeared to his worshippers, and was seen harping and dancing in the sky
until the rising of the Pleiades.[50] The other corresponding festival
was "Samhain"[51], the autumn equinox. As Beltaine marked the beginning
of summer, so Samhain recorded its end. The summer solstice was also a
great Celtic feast. It was held at the beginning of August in honour of
the god called Lugus by the Gauls, Lugh by the Gaels, and Lleu by the
Britons-the pan-Celtic Apollo, and, probably, when the cult of the
war-god had fallen from its early prominence, the chief figure of the
common Pantheon.

It was doubtless at Stonehenge that the British Apollo was thus seen
harping and dancing. That marvellous structure well corresponds to
Diodorus's description of a "magnificent temple of Apollo" which he
locates "in the centre of Britain". "It is a circular enclosure," he
says, "adorned with votive offerings and tablets with Greek inscriptions
suspended by travellers upon the walls. The rulers of the temple and
city are called Boread'[52], and they take up the government from each
other according to the order of their tribes. The citizens are given up
to music, harping and chanting in honour of the sun."[53] Stonehenge,
therefore, was a sacred religious centre, equally revered by and equally
belonging to all the British tribes-a Rome or Jerusalem of our ancient
paganism.

The same great gods were, no doubt, adored by all the Celts, not only of
Great Britain and Ireland, but of Continental Gaul as well. Sometimes
they can be traced by name right across the ancient Celtic world. In
other cases, what is obviously the same personified power of nature is
found in various places with the same attributes, but with a different
title. Besides these, there must have been a multitude of lesser gods,
worshipped by certain tribes alone, to whom they stood as ancestors and
guardians. "I swear by the gods of my people", was the ordinary oath of
a hero in the ancient Gaelic sagas. The aboriginal tribes must also have
had their gods, whether it be true or not that their religion influenced
the Celtic Druidism. Professor Rhys inclines to see in the _genii
locorum_, the almost nameless spirits of well and river, mountain and
wood-shadowy remnants of whose cults survive to-day,-members of a
swarming Pantheon of the older Iberians.[54] These local beings would in
no way conflict with the great Celtic nature-gods, and the two worships
could exist side by side, both even claiming the same votary. It needs
the stern faith of monotheism to deny the existence of the gods of
others. Polytheistic nations have seldom or never risen to such a
height. In their dealings with a conquered people, the conquerors
naturally held their own gods to be the stronger. Still, it could not be
denied that the gods of the conquered were upon their own ground; they
knew, so to speak, the country, and might have unguessed powers of doing
evil! What if, to avenge their worshippers and themselves, they were to
make the land barren and useless to the conquerors? So that conquering
pagan nations have usually been quite ready to stretch out the hand of
welcome to the deities of their new subjects, to propitiate them by
sacrifice, and even to admit them within the pale of their own Pantheon.

This raises the question of the exact nationality of the gods whose
stories we are about to tell. Were they all Aryan, or did any of the
greater aboriginal deities climb up to take their place among the Gaelic
tribe of the goddess Danu, or the British children of the goddess Dn?
Some of the Celtic gods have seemed to scholars to bear signs of a
non-Aryan origin.[55] The point, however, is at present very obscure.
Neither does it much concern us. Just as the diverse deities of the
Greeks-some Aryan and Hellenic, some pre-Aryan and Pelasgian, some
imported and Semitic-were all gathered into one great divine family, so
we may consider as members of one national Olympus all these gods whose
legends make up "The Mythology of the British Islands".

-----

Footnote 31:

  See Schrader: _Prehistoric Antiquities of the Aryan Peoples_, pp. 138,
  272.

Footnote 32:

  A description of the Druidical cult of the mistletoe is given by
  Pliny: _Natural History_, XVI, chap. XCV.

Footnote 33:

  See Frazer: _The Golden Bough_, chap. IV.

Footnote 34:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book VI, chaps. XIII, XIV. But for a full
  exposition of what is known of the Druids the reader is referred to M.
  d'Arbois de Jubainville's _Introduction  l'tude de la Littrature
  Celtique_, Vol. I of his _Cours de Littrature Celtique_.

Footnote 35:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book VI, chap. XIII.

Footnote 36:

  Pliny: _Natural History_, XXX.

Footnote 37:

  See chap. XII, _The Irish Iliad_.

Footnote 38:

  Rhys: _Celtic Britain_, chap. II. See also Gomme: _Ethnology in
  Folk-lore_, pp. 58-62; _Village Community_, p. 104.

Footnote 39:

  Abundant evidence of this is contained in Pausanias' _Description of
  Greece_.

Footnote 40:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book VI, chap. XIV.

Footnote 41:

  The _Wooing of Emer_.

Footnote 42:

  It is contained in the Book of the Dun Cow, and has been translated or
  commented upon by Eugene O'Curry (_Manners and Customs of the Ancient
  Irish_), De Jubainville (_Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_), and Nutt
  (_Voyage of Bran_).

Footnote 43:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book VI, chap. XVI.

Footnote 44:

  The following translation was made by Dr. Kuno Meyer, and appears as
  Appendix B to Nutt's _Voyage of Bran_. Three verses, here omitted,
  will be found later as a note to chap. XII-"The Irish Iliad".

Footnote 45:

  The first King of the Milesians. The name is more usually spelt
  Eremon.

Footnote 46:

  The Rennes _Dinnsenchus_ has been translated by Dr. Whitley Stokes in
  Vol. XVI of the _Revue Celtique_.

Footnote 47:

  Told in the Tripartite Life of Saint Patrick, a fifteenth-century
  combination of three very ancient Gaelic MSS.

Footnote 48:

  The _Hibbert Lectures_ for 1886. Lecture II-"The Zeus of the Insular
  Celts".

Footnote 49:

  Pronounced _Baltinna_.

Footnote 50:

  _Diodorus Siculus_: Book II, chap. III.

Footnote 51:

  Pronounced _Sowin_.

Footnote 52:

  It has been suggested that this title is an attempt to reproduce the
  ancient British word for "bards".

Footnote 53:

  _Diodorus Siculus_: Book II, chap. III.

Footnote 54:

  _Hibbert Lectures_, 1886. Lecture I-"The Gaulish Pantheon".

Footnote 55:

  See Rhys: _Lectures on Welsh Philology_, pp. 426, 552, 653.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       THE GAELIC GODS AND THEIR
                                STORIES




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER V

                         THE GODS OF THE GAELS


Of the two Celtic races that settled in our islands, it is the earlier,
the Gaels, that has best preserved its old mythology. It is true that we
have in few cases such detailed account of the Gaelic gods as we gain of
the Hellenic deities from the Greek poets, of the Indian Devas from the
Rig Veda, or of the Norse sir from the Eddas. Yet none the less may we
draw from the ancient Irish manuscripts quite enough information to
enable us to set forth their figures with some clearness. We find them,
as might have been anticipated, very much like the divine hierarchies of
other Aryan peoples.

We also find them separated into two opposing camps, a division common
to all the Aryan religions. Just as the Olympians struggled with the
Giants, the sir fought the Jtuns, and the Devas the Asuras, so there
is warfare in the Gaelic spiritual world between two superhuman hosts.
On one side are ranged the gods of day, light, life, fertility, wisdom,
and good; on the other, the demons of night, darkness, death,
barrenness, and evil. The first were the great spirits symbolizing the
beneficial aspects of nature and the arts and intelligence of man; the
second were the hostile powers thought to be behind such baneful
manifestations as storm and fog, drought and disease. The first are
ranged as a divine family round a goddess called Danu, from whom they
took their well-known name of _Tuatha D Danann_,[56] "Tribe" or "Folk
of the Goddess Danu". The second owned allegiance to a female divinity
called Domnu; their king, Indech, is described as her son, and they are
all called "Domnu's gods". The word "Domnu" appears to have signified
the abyss or the deep sea,[57] and the same idea is also expressed in
their better-known name of "Fomors", derived from two Gaelic words
meaning "under sea".[58] The waste of water seems to have always
impressed the Celts with the sense of primeval ancientness; it was
connected in their minds with vastness, darkness, and monstrous
births-the very antithesis of all that was symbolized by the earth, the
sky, and the sun.

Therefore the Fomors were held to be more ancient than the gods, before
whom they were, however, destined to fall in the end. Offspring of
"Chaos and Old Night", they were, for the most part, huge and deformed.
Some had but one arm and one leg apiece, while others had the heads of
goats, horses, or bulls.[59] The most famous, and perhaps the most
terrible of them all was Balor, whose father is said to have been one
Buarainech, that is, the "cow-faced",[60] and who combined in himself
the two classical rles of the Cyclops and the Medusa. Though he had two
eyes, one was always kept shut, for it was so venomous that it slew
anyone on whom its look fell. This malignant quality of Balor's eye was
not natural to him, but was the result of an accident. Urged by
curiosity, he once looked in at the window of a house where his father's
sorcerers were preparing a magic potion, and the poisonous smoke from
the cauldron reached his eye, infecting it with so much of its own
deadly nature as to make it disastrous to others. Neither god nor giant
seems to have been exempt from its dangers; so that Balor was only
allowed to live on condition that he kept his terrible eye shut. On days
of battle he was placed opposite to the enemy, the lid of the destroying
eye was lifted up with a hook, and its gaze withered all who stood
before it. The memory of Balor and his eye still lingers in Ireland: the
"eye of Balor" is the name for what the peasantry of other countries
call the "evil eye"; stories are still told of _Balar Beimann_, or
"Balor of the Mighty Blows"; and "Balor's Castle" is the name of a
curious cliff on Tory Island. This island, off the coast of Donegal, was
the Fomorian outpost upon earth, their real abode being in the cold
depths of the sea.

This rule, however, as to the hideousness of the Fomors had its
exceptions. Elathan, one of their chiefs, is described in an old
manuscript as of magnificent presence-a Miltonic prince of darkness. "A
man of fairest form," it says, "with golden hair down to his shoulders.
He wore a mantle of gold braid over a shirt interwoven with threads of
gold. Five golden necklaces were round his neck, and a brooch of gold
with a shining precious stone thereon was on his breast. He carried two
silver spears with rivets of bronze, and his sword was golden-hilted and
golden-studded."[61] Nor was his son less handsome. His name was Bress,
which means "beautiful", and we are told that every beautiful thing in
Ireland, "whether plain, or fortress, or ale, or torch, or woman, or
man", was compared with him, so that men said of them, "that is a
Bress".[62]

Balor, Bress, and Elathan are the three Fomorian personages whose
figures, seen through the mists of antiquity, show clearest to us. But
they are only a few out of many, nor are they the oldest. We can learn,
however, nothing but a few names of any ancestors of the Gaelic giants.
This is equally true of the Gaelic gods. Those we know are evidently not
without parentage, but the names of their fathers are no more than
shadows following into oblivion the figures they designated. The most
ancient divinity of whom we have any knowledge is Danu herself, the
goddess from whom the whole hierarchy of gods received its name of
Tuatha D Danann. She was also called Anu or Ana, and her name still
clings to two well-known mountains near Killarney, which, though now
called simply "The Paps", were known formerly as the "Paps of Ana".[63]
She was the universal mother; "well she used to cherish the gods", says
the commentator of a ninth-century Irish glossary.[64] Her husband is
never mentioned by name, but one may assume him, from British analogies,
to have been Bil, known to Gaelic tradition as a god of Hades, a kind
of Celtic Dis Pater from whom sprang the first men. Danu herself
probably represented the earth and its fruitfulness, and one might
compare her with the Greek Demeter. All the other gods are, at least by
title, her children. The greatest of these would seem to have been
Nuada, called _Argetlm_, or "He of the Silver Hand". He was at once the
Gaelic Zeus, or Jupiter, and their war-god; for among primitive nations,
to whom success in war is all-important, the god of battles is the
supreme god.[65] Among the Gauls, Camulus, whose name meant
"Heaven",[66] was identified by the Romans with Mars; and other such
instances come readily to the mind. He was possessed of an invincible
sword, one of the four chief treasures of the Tuatha D Danann, over
whom he was twice king; and there is little doubt that he was one of the
most important gods of both the Gaels and the Britons, for his name is
spread over the whole of the British Isles, which we may surmise the
Celts conquered under his auspices. We may picture him as a more savage
Mars, delighting in battle and slaughter, and worshipped, like his
Gaulish affinities, Teutates and Hesus, of whom the Latin poet Lucan
tells us, with human sacrifices, shared in by his female consorts, who,
we may imagine, were not more merciful than himself, or than that
Gaulish Taranis whose cult was "no gentler than that of the Scythian
Diana", and who completes Lucan's triad as a fit companion to the
"pitiless Teutates" and the "horrible Hesus".[67] Of these warlike
goddesses there were five-Fea, the "Hateful", Nemon, the "Venomous",
Badb, the "Fury", Macha, a personification of "battle", and, over all of
them, the Morrg, or "Great Queen". This supreme war-goddess of the
Gaels, who resembles a fiercer Her, perhaps symbolized the moon, deemed
by early races to have preceded the sun, and worshipped with magical and
cruel rites. She is represented as going fully armed, and carrying two
spears in her hand. As with Ars[68] and Poseidon[69] in the "Iliad",
her battle-cry was as loud as that of ten thousand men. Wherever there
was war, either among gods or men, she, the great queen, was present,
either in her own shape or in her favourite disguise, that of a "hoodie"
or carrion crow. An old poem shows her inciting a warrior:

              "Over his head is shrieking
                 A lean hag, quickly hopping
               Over the points of the weapons and shields;
                 She is the gray-haired Morrg".[70]

With her, Fea and Nemon, Badb and Macha also hovered over the fighters,
inspiring them with the madness of battle. All of these were sometimes
called by the name of "Badb"[71]. An account of the Battle of Clontarf,
fought by Brian Boru, in 1014, against the Norsemen, gives a gruesome
picture of what the Gaels believed to happen in the spiritual world when
battle lowered and men's blood was aflame. "There arose a wild,
impetuous, precipitate, mad, inexorable, furious, dark, lacerating,
merciless, combative, contentious _badb_, which was shrieking and
fluttering over their heads. And there arose also the satyrs, and
sprites, and the maniacs of the valleys, and the witches and goblins and
owls, and destroying demons of the air and firmament, and the demoniac
phantom host; and they were inciting and sustaining valour and battle
with them." When the fight was over, they revelled among the bodies of
the slain; the heads cut off as barbaric trophies were called "Macha's
acorn crop". These grim creations of the savage mind had immense
vitality. While Nuada, the supreme war-god, vanished early out of the
Pantheon-killed by the Fomors in the great battle fought between them
and the gods-Badb and the Morrg lived on as late as any of the Gaelic
deities. Indeed, they may be said to still survive in the superstitious
dislike and suspicion shown in all Celtic-speaking countries for their
_avatar_, the hoodie-crow.[72]

After Nuada, the greatest of the gods was the Dagda, whose name seems to
have meant the "Good God".[73] The old Irish tract called "The Choice of
Names" tells us that he was a god of the earth; he had a cauldron called
"The Undry", in which everyone found food in proportion to his merits,
and from which none went away unsatisfied. He also had a living harp; as
he played upon it, the seasons came in their order-spring following
winter, and summer succeeding spring, autumn coming after summer, and,
in its turn, giving place to winter. He is represented as of venerable
aspect and of simple mind and tastes, very fond of porridge, and a
valiant consumer of it. In an ancient tale we have a description of his
dress. He wore a brown, low-necked tunic which only reached down to his
hips, and, over this, a hooded cape which barely covered his shoulders.
On his feet and legs were horse-hide boots, the hairy side outwards. He
carried, or, rather, drew after him on a wheel, an eight-pronged
war-club, so huge that eight men would have been needed to carry it; and
the wheel, as he towed the whole weapon along, made a track like a
territorial boundary.[74] Ancient and gray-headed as he was, and sturdy
porridge-eater, it will be seen from this that he was a formidable
fighter. He did great deeds in the battle between the gods and the
Fomors, and, on one occasion, is even said to have captured
single-handed a hundred-legged and four-headed monster called Mata,
dragged him to the "Stone of Benn", near the Boyne, and killed him
there.

The Dagda's wife was called Boann. She was connected in legend with the
River Boyne, to which she gave its name, and, indeed, its very
existence.[75] Formerly there was only a well[76], shaded by nine magic
hazel-trees. These trees bore crimson nuts, and it was the property of
the nuts that whoever ate of them immediately became possessed of the
knowledge of everything that was in the world. The story is, in fact, a
Gaelic version of the Hebrew myth of "the Tree of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil". One class of creatures alone had this privilege-divine salmon
who lived in the well, and swallowed the nuts as they dropped from the
trees into the water, and thus knew all things, and appear in legend as
the "Salmons of Knowledge". All others, even the highest gods, were
forbidden to approach the place. Only Boann, with the proverbial woman's
curiosity, dared to disobey this fixed law. She came towards the sacred
well, but, as she did so, its waters rose up at her, and drove her away
before them in a mighty, rushing flood. She escaped; but the waters
never returned. They made the Boyne; and as for the all-knowing
inhabitants of the well, they wandered disconsolately through the depths
of the river, looking in vain for their lost nuts. One of these salmon
was afterwards eaten by the famous Finn mac Coul, upon whom all its
omniscience descended.[77] This way of accounting for the existence of a
river is a favourite one in Irish legend. It is told also of the
Shannon, which burst, like the Boyne, from an inviolable well, to pursue
another presumptuous nymph called Sinann, a granddaughter of the sea-god
Lr.[78]

The Dagda had several children, the most important of whom are Brigit,
Angus, Mider, Ogma, and Bodb the Red. Of these, Brigit will be already
familiar to English readers who know nothing of Celtic myth. Originally
she was a goddess of fire and the hearth, as well as of poetry, which
the Gaels deemed an immaterial, supersensual form of flame. But the
early Christianizers of Ireland adopted the pagan goddess into their
roll of saintship, and, thus canonized, she obtained immense popularity
as Saint Bridget, or Bride.[79]

Angus was called _Mac Oc_, which means the "Son of the Young", or,
perhaps, the "Young God". This most charming of the creations of the
Celtic mythology is represented as a Gaelic Eros, an eternally youthful
exponent of love and beauty. Like his father, he had a harp, but it was
of gold, not oak, as the Dagda's was, and so sweet was its music that no
one could hear and not follow it. His kisses became birds which hovered
invisibly over the young men and maidens of Erin, whispering thoughts of
love into their ears. He is chiefly connected with the banks of the
Boyne, where he had a "brugh", or fairy palace; and many stories are
told of his exploits and adventures.

Mider, also the hero of legends, would seem to have been a god of the
underworld, a Gaelic Pluto. As such, he was connected with the Isle of
Falga-a name for what was otherwise, and still is, called the Isle of
Man-where he had a stronghold in which he kept three wonderful cows and
a magic cauldron. He was also the owner of the "Three Cranes of Denial
and Churlishness", which might be described flippantly as personified
"gentle hints". They stood beside his door, and when anyone approached
to ask for hospitality, the first one said: "Do not come! do not come!"
and the second added: "Get away! get away!" while the third chimed in
with: "Go past the house! go past the house!"[80] These three birds
were, however, stolen from Mider by Aitherne, an avaricious poet, to
whom they would seem to have been more appropriate than to their owner,
who does not otherwise appear as a churlish and illiberal deity.[81] On
the contrary, he is represented as the victim of others, who plundered
him freely. The god Angus took away his wife Etain,[82] while his cows,
his cauldron, and his beautiful daughter Blathnat were carried off as
spoil by the heroes or demi-gods who surrounded King Conchobar in the
golden age of Ulster.

Ogma, who appears to have been also called Cermait, that is, the
"honey-mouthed", was the god of literature and eloquence. He married
Etan, the daughter of Diancecht, the god of medicine, and had several
children, who play parts more or less prominent in the mythology of the
Gaelic Celts. One of them was called Tuirenn, whose three sons murdered
the father of the sun-god, and were compelled, as expiation, to pay the
greatest fine ever heard of-nothing less than the chief treasures of the
world.[83] Another son, Cairpr, became the professional bard of the
Tuatha D Danann, while three others reigned for a short time over the
divine race. As patron of literature, Ogma was naturally credited with
having been the inventor of the famous _Ogam_ alphabet. This was an
indigenous script of Ireland, which spread afterwards to Great Britain,
inscriptions in ogmic characters having been found in Scotland, the Isle
of Man, South Wales, Devonshire, and at Silchester in Hampshire, the
Roman city of Calleva Attrebatum. It was originally intended for
inscriptions upon upright pillar-stones or upon wands, the equivalents
for letters being notches cut across, or strokes made upon one of the
faces of the angle, the alphabet running as follows:

[Illustration]

When afterwards written in manuscript, the strokes were placed over,
under, or through a horizontal line, in the manner above; and the vowels
were represented by short lines instead of notches, as:

[Illustration]

A good example of an ogmic inscription is given in Professor Rhys's
_Hibbert Lectures_. It comes from a pillar on a small promontory near
Dunmore Head, in the west of Kerry, and, read horizontally, reads:

[Illustration: ERC, THE SON OF THE SON OF ERCA (DESCENDANT OF)
MODOVINIA.[84]]

The origin of this alphabet is obscure. Some authorities consider it of
great antiquity, while others believe it entirely post-Christian. It
seems, at any rate, to have been based upon, and consequently to
presuppose a knowledge of, the Roman alphabet.

Ogma, besides being the patron of literature, was the champion, or
professional strong man of the Tuatha D Danann. His epithet is
_Grianainech_, that is, the "Sunny-faced", from his radiant and shining
countenance.

The last of the Dagda's more important children is Bodb[85] the Red, who
plays a greater part in later than in earlier legend. He succeeded his
father as king of the gods. He is chiefly connected with the south of
Ireland, especially with the Galtee Mountains, and with Lough Dearg,
where he had a famous _sdh_, or underground palace.

The Poseidon of the Tuatha D Danann Pantheon was called Lr, but we
hear little of him in comparison with his famous son, Manannn, the
greatest and most popular of his many children. Manannn mac Lir[86] was
the special patron of sailors, who invoked him as "God of Headlands",
and of merchants, who claimed him as the first of their guild. His
favourite haunts were the Isle of Man, to which he gave his name, and
the Isle of Arran, in the Firth of Clyde, where he had a palace called
"Emhain of the Apple-Trees". He had many famous weapons-two spears
called "Yellow Shaft" and "Red Javelin", a sword called "The
Retaliator", which never failed to slay, as well as two others known as
the "Great Fury" and the "Little Fury". He had a boat called
"Wave-sweeper", which propelled and guided itself wherever its owner
wished, and a horse called "Splendid Mane", which was swifter than the
spring wind, and travelled equally fast on land or over the waves of the
sea. No weapon could hurt him through his magic mail and breast-plate,
and on his helmet there shone two magic jewels bright as the sun. He
endowed the gods with the mantle which made them invisible at will, and
he fed them from his pigs, which, like the boar Shrimnir, in the Norse
Valhalla, renewed themselves as soon as they had been eaten. Of these,
no doubt, he made his "Feast of Age", the banquet at which those who ate
never grew old. Thus the people of the goddess Danu preserved their
immortal youth, while the ale of Goibniu the Smith-God bestowed
invulnerability upon them. It is fitting that Manannn himself should
have been blessed beyond all the other gods with inexhaustible life; up
to the latest days of Irish heroic literature his luminous figure shines
prominent, nor is it even yet wholly forgotten.

Goibniu, the Gaelic Hephaestus, who made the people of the goddess Danu
invulnerable with his magic drink, was also the forger of their weapons.
It was he who, helped by Luchtain, the divine carpenter, and Credn,
the divine bronze-worker, made the armoury with which the Tuatha D
Danann conquered the Fomors. Equally useful to them was Diancecht, the
god of medicine.[87] It was he who once saved Ireland, and was
indirectly the cause of the name of the River Barrow. The Morrg, the
heaven-god's fierce wife, had borne a son of such terrible aspect that
the physician of the gods, foreseeing danger, counselled that he should
be destroyed in his infancy. This was done; and Diancecht opened the
infant's heart, and found within it three serpents, capable, when they
grew to full size, of depopulating Ireland. He lost no time in
destroying these serpents also, and burning them into ashes, to avoid
the evil which even their dead bodies might do. More than this, he flung
the ashes into the nearest river, for he feared that there might be
danger even in them; and, indeed, so venomous were they that the river
boiled up and slew every living creature in it, and therefore has been
called "Barrow" (boiling) ever since.[88]

Diancecht had several children, of whom two followed their father's
profession. These were Miach and his sister Airmid. There were also
another daughter, Etan, who married Cermait (or Ogma), and three other
sons called Cian, Ceth, and Cu. Cian married Ethniu, the daughter of
Balor the Fomor, and they had a son who was the crowning glory of the
Gaelic Pantheon-its Apollo, the Sun-God,-Lugh[89], called
_Lamhfada_[90], which means the "Long-handed", or the "Far-shooter". It
was not, however, with the bow, like the Apollo of the Greeks, but with
the rod-sling that Lugh performed his feats; his worshippers sometimes
saw the terrible weapon in the sky as a rainbow, and the Milky Way was
called "Lugh's Chain". He also had a magic spear, which, unlike the
rod-sling, he had no need to wield, himself; for it was alive, and
thirsted so for blood that only by steeping its head in a
sleeping-draught of pounded poppy leaves could it be kept at rest. When
battle was near, it was drawn out; then it roared, and struggled against
its thongs; fire flashed from it; and, once slipped from the leash, it
tore through and through the ranks of the enemy, never tired of slaying.
Another of his possessions was a magic hound which an ancient poem,[91]
attributed to the Fenian hero, Caoilte, calls-

            "That hound of mightiest deeds,
             Which was irresistible in hardness of combat,
             Was better than wealth ever known,
             A ball of fire every night.

            "Other virtues had that beautiful hound
             (Better this property than any other property),
             Mead or wine would grow of it,
             Should it bathe in spring water."

This marvellous hound, as well as the marvellous spear, and the
indestructible pigs of Manannn were obtained for Lugh by the sons of
Tuirenn as part of the blood-fine he exacted from them for the murder of
his father Cian.[92] A hardly less curious story is that which tells how
Lugh got his name of the _Ioldanach_, or the "Master of All Arts".[93]

These are, of course, only the greater deities of the Gaelic Pantheon,
their divinities which answered to such Hellenic figures as Demeter,
Zeus, Her, Cronos, Athena, Eros, Hades, Hermes, Hephaestus,
Aesculapius, and Apollo. All of them had many descendants, some of whom
play prominent parts in the heroic cycles of the "Red Branch of Ulster"
and of the "Fenians". In addition to these, there must have been a
multitude of lesser gods who stood in much the same relation to the
great gods as the rank and file of tribesmen did to their chiefs. Most
of these were probably local deities of the various clans-the gods their
heroes swore by. But it is also possible that some may have been
divinities of the aboriginal race. Professor Rhys thinks that he can
still trace a few of such Iberian gods by name, as Nt, Ri or Roi, Corb,
and Beth.[94] But they play no recognizable part in the stories of the
Gaelic gods.

-----

Footnote 56:

  Pronounced _Tooha dae donnann_.

Footnote 57:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, 1886. Lecture VI-"Gods, Demons, and Heroes".

Footnote 58:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 59:

  De Jubainville: _Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_, chap. V.

Footnote 60:

  De Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_, chap. IX.

Footnote 61:

  From the fifteenth-century Harleian MS. in the British Museum,
  numbered 5280, and called the _Second Battle of Moytura_.

Footnote 62:

  Harleian MS. 5280.

Footnote 63:

  "In Munster was worshipped the goddess of prosperity, whose name was
  Ana, and from her are named the Two Paps of Ana over Luachair Degad."
  From _Coir Anmann_, the _Choice of Names_, a sixteenth-century tract,
  published by Dr. Whitley Stokes in _Irische Texte_.

Footnote 64:

  Attributed to Cormac, King-Bishop of Cashel.

Footnote 65:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, 1886-"The Zeus of the Insular Celts".

Footnote 66:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, 1886-"The Gaulish Pantheon".

Footnote 67:

  _Pharsalia_, Book I, l. 444, &c.:

              "Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro
               Teutates, horrensque feris altaribus Hesus;
               Et Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae".

Footnote 68:

  _Iliad_, Book V.

Footnote 69:

  _Op. cit._, Book XIV.

Footnote 70:

  It commemorates the battle of Magh Rath.

Footnote 71:

  The word is approximately pronounced _Bive_ or _Bibe_.

Footnote 72:

  For a full account of these beings see a paper by Mr. W. M. Hennessey
  in Vol. I of the _Revue Celtique_, entitled "The Ancient Irish Goddess
  of War".

Footnote 73:

  De Jubainville: _Le Cycle Mythologique_. Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p.
  154. The _Coir Anmann_, however, translates it "Fire of God".

Footnote 74:

  _The Second Battle of Moytura._ Harleian MS. 5280.

Footnote 75:

  The story is told in the Book of Leinster.

Footnote 76:

  Now called "Trinity Well".

Footnote 77:

  See chap. XIV-"Finn and the Fenians".

Footnote 78:

  Book of Leinster. A paraphrase of the story will be found in O'Curry's
  _Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish_, Vol. II, p. 143.

Footnote 79:

  See chap. XV-"The Decline and Fall of the Gods".

Footnote 80:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 331.

Footnote 81:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 331.

Footnote 82:

  See chap. XI-"The Gods in Exile".

Footnote 83:

  See chap. VIII-"The Gaelic Argonauts".

Footnote 84:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 524.

Footnote 85:

  Pronounced _Bove_.

Footnote 86:

  Lr-genitive Lir.

Footnote 87:

  Pronounced _Dianket_. His name is explained, both in the _Choice of
  Names_ and in Cormac's _Glossary_, as meaning "God of Health".

Footnote 88:

  Standish O'Grady: _The Story of Ireland_, p. 17.

Footnote 89:

  Pronounced _Luga_ or _Loo_.

Footnote 90:

  Pronounced _Lavda_.

Footnote 91:

  Translated by O'Curry in _Atlantis_, Vol. III, from the Book of
  Lismore.

Footnote 92:

  Chap. VIII-"The Gaelic Argonauts".

Footnote 93:

  Chap. VII-"The Rise of the Sun-God".

Footnote 94:

  Rhys: _Celtic Britain_, chap. VII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER VI

                            THE GODS ARRIVE


The people of the goddess Danu were not the first divine inhabitants of
Ireland. Others had been before them, dwellers in "the dark backward and
abysm of time". In this the Celtic mythology resembles those of other
nations, in almost all of which we find an old, dim realm of gods
standing behind the reigning Pantheon. Such were Cronos and the Titans,
dispossessed by the Zeus who seemed, even to Hesiod, something of a
_parvenu_ deity. Gaelic tradition recognizes two divine dynasties
anterior to the Tuatha D Danann. The first of these was called "The
Race of Partholon". Its head and leader came-as all gods and men came,
according to Celtic ideas-from the Other World, and landed in Ireland
with a retinue of twenty-four males and twenty-four females upon the
first of May, the day called "Beltaine", sacred to Bil, the god of
death. At this remote time, Ireland consisted of only one treeless,
grassless plain, watered by three lakes and nine rivers. But, as the
race of Partholon increased, the land stretched, or widened, under
them-some said miraculously, and others, by the labours of Partholon's
people. At any rate, during the three hundred years they dwelt there, it
grew from one plain to four, and acquired seven new lakes; which was
fortunate, for the race of Partholon increased from forty-eight members
to five thousand, in spite of battles with the Fomors.

These would seem to have been inevitable. Whatever gods ruled, they
found themselves in eternal opposition to the not-gods-the powers of
darkness, winter, evil, and death. The race of Partholon warred against
them with success. At the Plain of Ith, Partholon defeated their leader,
a gigantic demon called Cichol the Footless, and dispersed his deformed
and monstrous host. After this there was quiet for three hundred years.
Then-upon the same fatal first of May-there began a mysterious epidemic,
which lasted a week, and destroyed them all. In premonition of their
end, they foregathered upon the original, first-created plain-then
called _Sen Mag_, or the "Old Plain",-so that those who survived might
the more easily bury those that died. Their funeral-place is still
marked by a mound near Dublin, called "Tallaght" in the maps, but
formerly known as _Tamlecht Muintre Partholain_, the "Plague-grave of
Partholon's People". This would seem to have been a development of the
very oldest form of the legend-which knew nothing of a plague, but
merely represented the people of Partholon as having returned, after
their sojourn in Ireland, to the other world, whence they came-and is
probably due to the gradual euhemerization of the ancient gods into
ancient men.

Following the race of Partholon, came the race of Nemed, which carried
on the work and traditions of its forerunner. During its time, Ireland
again enlarged herself, to the extent of twelve new plains and four more
lakes. Like the people of Partholon, the race of Nemed struggled with
the Fomors, and defeated them in four consecutive battles. Then Nemed
died, with two thousand of his people, from an epidemic, and the
remnant, left without their leader, were terribly oppressed by the
Fomors. Two Fomorian kings-Morc, son of Dela, and Conann, son of
Febar-had built a tower of glass upon Tory Island, always their chief
stronghold, and where stories of them still linger, and from this
vantage-point they dictated a tax which recalls that paid, in Greek
story, to the Cretan Minotaur. Two-thirds of the children born to the
race of Nemed during the year were to be delivered up on each day of
Samhain. Goaded by this to a last desperate effort, the survivors of
Nemed's people attacked the tower, and took it, Conann perishing in the
struggle. But their triumph was short. Morc, the other king, collected
his forces, and inflicted such a slaughter upon the people of Nemed
that, out of the sixteen thousand who had assembled for the storming of
the tower, only thirty survived. And these returned whence they came, or
died-the two acts being, mythologically speaking, the same.[95]

One cannot help seeing a good deal of similarity between the stories of
these two mythical invasions of Ireland. Especially noticeable is the
account of the epidemic which destroyed all Partholon's people and
nearly all of Nemed's. Hence it has been held that the two legends are
duplicates, and that there was at first only one, which has been adapted
somewhat differently by two races, the Iberians and the Gaels. Professor
Rhys considers[96] the account of Nemed to have been the original Celtic
one, and the Partholon story, the version of it which the native races
made to please themselves. The name "Partholon", with its initial _p_,
is entirely foreign to the genius of Gaelic speech. Moreover, Partholon
himself is given, by the early chroniclers, ancestors whose decidedly
non-Aryan names reappear afterwards as the names of Fir Bolg chiefs.
Nemed was later than Partholon in Ireland, as the Gaels, or "Milesians",
were later than the Iberians, or "Fir Bolgs".

These "Fir Bolgs" are found in myth as the next colonizers of Ireland.
Varying traditions say that they came from Greece, or from "Spain"-which
was a post-Christian euphemism for the Celtic Hades.[97] They consisted
of three tribes, called the "Fir Domnann" or "Men of Domnu", the "Fir
Gaillion" or "Men of Gaillion", and the "Fir Bolg" or "Men of Bolg";
but, in spite of the fact that the first-named tribe was the most
important, they are usually called collectively after the last. Curious
stories are told of their life in Greece, and how they came to Ireland;
but these are somewhat factitious, and obviously do not belong to the
earliest tradition.

In the time of their domination they had, we are told, partitioned
Ireland among them: the Fir Bolg held Ulster; the Fir Domnann, divided
into three kingdoms, occupied North Munster, South Munster, and
Connaught; while the Fir Gaillion owned Leinster. These five provinces
met at a hill then called "Balor's Hill", but afterwards the "Hill of
Uisnech". It is near Rathconrath, in the county of West Meath, and was
believed, in early times, to mark the exact centre of Ireland. They held
the country from the departure of the people of Nemed to the coming of
the people of the goddess Danu, and during this period they had nine
supreme kings. At the time of the arrival of the gods, their king's name
was Eochaid[98] son of Erc, surnamed "The Proud".

We have practically no other details regarding their life in Ireland. It
is obvious, however, that they were not really gods, but the pre-Aryan
race which the Gaels, when they landed in Ireland, found already in
occupation. There are many instances of peoples at a certain stage of
culture regarding tribes in a somewhat lower one as semi-divine, or,
rather, half-diabolical.[99] The suspicion and fear with which the early
Celts must have regarded the savage aborigines made them seem "larger
than human". They feared them for the weird magical rites which they
practised in their inaccessible forts among the hills, amid storms and
mountain mists. The Gaels, who held themselves to be the children of
light, deemed these "dark Iberians" children of the dark. Their tribal
names seem to have been, in several instances, founded upon this idea.
There were the _Corca-Oidce_ ("People of Darkness") and the
_Corca-Duibhne_ ("People of the Night"). The territory of the western
tribe of the _Hi Dorchaide_ ("Sons of Dark") was called the "Night
Country".[100] The Celts, who held their own gods to have preceded them
into Ireland, would not believe that even the Tuatha D Danann could
have wrested the land from these magic-skilled Iberians without battle.

They seem also to have been considered as in some way connected with the
Fomors. Just as the largest Iberian tribe was called the "Men of Domnu",
so the Fomors were called the "Gods of Domnu", and Indech, one of their
kings, is a "son of Domnu". Thus eternal battle between the gods,
children of Danu, and the giants, children of Domnu, would reflect, in
the supernatural world, the perpetual warfare between invading Celt and
resisting Iberian. It is shadowed, too, in the later heroic cycle. The
champions of Ulster, Aryans and Gaels _par excellence_, have no such
bitter enemies as the Fir Domnann of Munster and the Fir Gaillion of
Leinster. A few scholars would even see in the later death-struggle
between the High King of Ireland and his rebellious Fenians the last
historic or mythological adumbration of racial war.[101]

The enemies alike of Fir Bolg and Fomor, the Tuatha D Danann, gods of
the Gaels, were the next to arrive. What is probably the earliest
account tells us that they came from the sky. Later versions, however,
give them a habitation upon earth-some say in the north, others in the
"southern isles of the world". They had dwelt in four mythical cities
called Findias, Gorias, Murias, and Falias, where they had learned
poetry and magic-to the primitive mind two not very dissimilar
things-and whence they had brought to Ireland their four chief
treasures. From Findias came Nuada's sword, from whose stroke no one
ever escaped or recovered; from Gorias, Lugh's terrible lance; from
Murias, the Dagda's cauldron; and from Falias, the Stone of Fl, better
known as the "Stone of Destiny", which afterwards fell into the hands of
the early kings of Ireland. According to legend, it had the magic
property of uttering a human cry when touched by the rightful King of
Erin. Some have recognized in this marvellous stone the same rude block
which Edward I brought from Scone in the year 1300, and placed in
Westminster Abbey, where it now forms part of the Coronation Chair. It
is a curious fact that, while Scottish legend asserts this stone to have
come to Scotland from Ireland, Irish legend should also declare that it
was taken from Ireland to Scotland. This would sound like conclusive
evidence, but it is none the less held by leading modern
archologists-including Dr. W. F. Skene, who has published a monograph
on the subject[102]-that the Stone of Scone and the Stone of Tara were
never the same. Dr. Petrie identifies the real _Lia Fil_ with a stone
which has always remained in Ireland, and which was removed from its
original position on Tara Hill, in 1798, to mark the tomb of the rebels
buried close by under a mound now known as "the Croppies' grave".[103]

Whether the Tuatha D Danann came from earth or heaven, they landed in a
dense cloud upon the coast of Ireland on the mystic first of May without
having been opposed, or even noticed by the people whom it will be
convenient to follow the manuscript authorities in calling the "Fir
Bolgs".[104] That those might still be ignorant of their coming, the
Morrg, helped by Badb and Macha, made use of the magic they had
learned in Findias, Gorias, Murias, and Falias. They spread
"druidically-formed showers and fog-sustaining shower-clouds" over the
country, and caused the air to pour down fire and blood upon the Fir
Bolgs, so that they were obliged to shelter themselves for three days
and three nights. But the Fir Bolgs had druids of their own, and, in the
end, they put a stop to these enchantments by counter-spells, and the
air grew clear again.

The Tuatha D Danann, advancing westward, had reached a place called the
"Plain of the Sea", in Leinster, when the two armies met. Each sent out
a warrior to parley. The two adversaries approached each other
cautiously, their eyes peeping over the tops of their shields. Then,
coming gradually nearer, they spoke to one another, and the desire to
examine each other's weapons made them almost friends.

The envoy of the Fir Bolgs looked with wonder at the
"beautifully-shaped, thin, slender, long, sharp-pointed spears" of the
warrior of the Tuatha D Danann, while the ambassador of the tribe of
the goddess Danu was not less impressed by the lances of the Fir Bolgs,
which were "heavy, thick, pointless, but sharply-rounded". They agreed
to exchange weapons, so that each side might, by an examination of them,
be able to come to some opinion as to its opponent's strength. Before
parting, the envoy of the Tuatha D Danann offered the Fir Bolgs,
through their representative, peace, with a division of the country into
two equal halves.

The Fir Bolg envoy advised his people to accept this offer. But their
king, Eochaid, son of Erc, would not. "If we once give these people
half," he said, "they will soon have the whole."

The people of the goddess Danu were, on the other hand, very much
impressed by the sight of the Fir Bolgs' weapons. They decided to secure
a more advantageous position, and, retreating farther west into
Connaught, to a plain then called Nia, but now Moytura, near the present
village of Cong, they drew up their line at its extreme end, in front of
the pass of Balgatan[105], which offered a retreat in case of defeat.

The Fir Bolgs followed them, and encamped on the nearer side of the
plain. Then Nuada, King of the Tuatha D Danann, sent an ambassador
offering the same terms as before. Again the Fir Bolgs declined them.

"Then when", asked the envoy, "do you intend to give battle?"

"We must have a truce," they said, "for we want time to repair our
armour, burnish our helmets, and sharpen our swords. Besides, we must
have spears like yours made for us, and you must have spears like ours
made for you."

The result of this chivalrous, but, to modern ideas, amazing, parley was
that a truce of one hundred and five days was agreed upon.

It was on Midsummer Day that the opposing armies at last met. The people
of the goddess Danu appeared in "a flaming line", wielding their
"red-bordered, speckled, and firm shields". Opposite to them were ranged
the Fir Bolgs, "sparkling, brilliant, and flaming, with their swords,
spears, blades, and trowel-spears". The proceedings began with a kind of
deadly hurley-match, in which thrice nine of the Tuatha D Danann played
the same number of the Fir Bolgs, and were defeated and killed. Then
followed another parley, to decide how the battle should be carried on,
whether there should be fighting every day or only on every second day.
Moreover, Nuada obtained from Eochaid an assurance that the battles
should always be fought with equal numbers, although this was, we are
told, "very disagreeable to the Fir Bolg king, because he had largely
the advantage in the numbers of his army". Then warfare recommenced with
a series of single combats, like those of the Greeks and Trojans in the
"Iliad". At the end of each day the conquerors on both sides went back
to their camps, and were refreshed by being bathed in healing baths of
medicinal herbs.

So the fight went on for four days, with terrible slaughter upon each
side. A Fir Bolg champion called Sreng fought in single combat with
Nuada, the King of the Gods, and shore off his hand and half his shield
with one terrific blow. Eochaid, the King of the Fir Bolgs, was even
less fortunate than Nuada; for he lost his life. Suffering terribly from
thirst, he went, with a hundred of his men, to look for water, and was
followed, and pursued as far as the strand of Ballysadare, in Sligo.
Here he turned to bay, but was killed, his grave being still marked by a
tumulus. The Fir Bolgs, reduced at last to three hundred men, demanded
single combat until all upon one side were slain. But, sooner than
consent to this, the Tuatha D Danann offered them a fifth part of
Ireland, whichever province they might choose. They agreed, and chose
Connaught, ever afterwards their especial home, and where, until the
middle of the seventeenth century, men were still found tracing their
descent from Sreng.

The whole story has a singularly historical, curiously unmythological
air about it, which contrasts strangely with the account of the other
battle of the same name which the Tuatha D Danann waged afterwards with
the Fomors. The neighbourhood of Cong still preserves both relics and
traditions of the fight. Upon the plain of "Southern Moytura" (as it is
called, to distinguish it from the "Northern Moytura" of the second
battle) are many circles and tumuli. These circles are especially
numerous near the village itself; and it is said that there were
formerly others, which have been used for making walls and dykes. Large
cairns of stones, too, are scattered over what was certainly once the
scene of a great battle.[106] These various prehistoric monuments each
have their still-told story; and Sir William Wilde, as he relates in his
_Lough Corrib_,[107] was so impressed by the unexpected agreement
between the details of the legendary battle, as he read them in the
ancient manuscript, and the traditions still attaching to the mounds,
circles, and cairns, that he tells us he could not help coming to the
conclusion that the account was absolutely historical. Certainly the
coincidences are curious. His opinion was that the "Fir Bolgs" were a
colony of Belg, and that the "Tuatha D Danann" were Danes. But the
people of the goddess Danu are too obviously mythical to make it worth
while to seek any standing-ground for them in the world of reality. In
their superhuman attributes, they are quite different from the Fir
Bolgs. In the epical cycle it is made as clear that the Tuatha D Danann
are divine beings as it is that the Fir Bolg, the Fir Domnann, and the
Fir Gaillion stand on exactly the same footing as the men of Ulster.
Later history records by what Milesian kings and on what terms of
rack-rent the three tribes were allowed settlements in other parts of
Ireland than their native Connaught. They appear in ancient, medival,
and almost modern chronicles as the old race of the land. The truth
seems to be that the whole story of the war between the gods and the Fir
Bolgs is an invention of comparatively late times. In the earliest
documents there is only one battle of Moytura, fought between the people
of the goddess Danu and the Fomors. The idea of doubling it seems to
date from after the eleventh century;[108] and its inventor may very
well have used the legends concerning this battle-field, where two
unknown armies had fought in days gone by, in compiling his story. It
never belonged to the same genuine mythological stratum as the legend of
the original battle fought by the Tuatha D Danann, the gods of the
Gaels, against the Fomors, the gods of the Iberians.

-----

Footnote 95:

  De Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique_, chap. V.

Footnote 96:

  Rhys: "The Mythographical Treatment of Celtic Ethnology", _Scottish
  Review_, Oct. 1890.

Footnote 97:

  De Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique_, chap. V. Rhys: _Hibbert
  Lectures_, pp. 90, 91.

Footnote 98:

  Pronounced _Ecca_ or _Eohee_.

Footnote 99:

  Gomme: _Ethnology in Folklore_, chap. III-"The Mythic Influence of a
  Conquered Race".

Footnote 100:

  Elton: _Origins of English History_, note to p. 136.

Footnote 101:

  It has been contended that the Fenians were originally the gods or
  heroes of an aboriginal people in Ireland, the myths about them
  representing the pre-Celtic and pre-Aryan ideal, as the sagas of the
  Red Branch of Ulster embodied that of the Celtic Aryans. The question,
  however, is as yet far from being satisfactorily solved.

Footnote 102:

  _The Coronation Stone_, by William Forbes Skene.

Footnote 103:

  See _History and Antiquities of Tara Hill_.

Footnote 104:

  Our authorities for the details of this war between the Tuatha D
  Danann and the Fir Bolgs are the opening verses of the Harleian MS.
  5280, as translated by Stokes and De Jubainville, and Eugene O'Curry's
  translations, in his _MS. Materials of Ancient Irish History_ and his
  _Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish_, from a manuscript
  preserved at Trinity College, Dublin.

Footnote 105:

  Now called Benlevi.

Footnote 106:

  See Dr. James Fergusson: _Rude Stone Monuments_, pp. 177-180.

Footnote 107:

  _Lough Corrib, Its Shores and Islands_, by Sir William R. Wilde, chap.
  VIII.

Footnote 108:

  De Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_, p. 156.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VII

                      THE RISE OF THE SUN-GOD[109]


It was as a result of the loss of his hand in this battle with the Fir
Bolgs that Nuada got his name of _Argetlm_, that is, the "Silver
Handed". For Diancecht, the physician of the Tuatha D Danann, made him
an artificial hand of silver, so skilfully that it moved in all its
joints, and was as strong and supple as a real one. But, good as it was
of its sort, it was a blemish; and, according to Celtic custom, no
maimed person could sit upon the throne. Nuada was deposed; and the
Tuatha D Danann went into council to appoint a new king.

They agreed that it would be a politic thing for them to conciliate the
Fomors, the giants of the sea, and make an alliance with them. So they
sent a message to Bress, the son of the Fomorian king, Elathan, asking
him to come and rule over them. Bress accepted this offer; and they made
a marriage between him and Brigit, the daughter of the Dagda. At the
same time, Cian[110], the son of Diancecht, the physician of the Tuatha
D Danann, married Ethniu, the daughter of the Fomor, Balor. Then Bress
was made king, and endowed with lands and a palace; and he, on his part,
gave hostages that he would abdicate if his rule ever became unpleasing
to those who had elected him.

But, in spite of all his fair promises, Bress, who belonged in heart to
his own fierce people, began to oppress his subjects with excessive
taxes. He put a tax upon every hearth, upon every kneading-trough, and
upon every quern, as well as a poll-tax of an ounce of gold upon every
member of the Tuatha D Danann. By a crafty trick, too, he obtained the
milk of all their cattle. He asked at first only for the produce of any
cows which happened to be brown and hairless, and the people of the
goddess Danu granted him this cheerfully. But Bress passed all the
cattle in Ireland between two fires, so that their hair was singed off,
and thus obtained the monopoly of the main source of food. To earn a
livelihood, all the gods, even the greatest, were now forced to labour
for him. Ogma, their champion, was sent out to collect firewood, while
the Dagda was put to work building forts and castles.

One day, when the Dagda was at his task, his son, Angus, came to him.
"You have nearly finished that castle," he said. "What reward do you
intend to ask from Bress when it is done?" The Dagda replied that he had
not yet thought of it. "Let me give you some advice," said Angus. "Ask
Bress to have all the cattle in Ireland gathered together upon a plain,
so that you can pick out one for yourself. He will consent to that. Then
choose the black-maned heifer called Ocean'."

The Dagda finished building the fort, and then went to Bress for his
reward. "What will you have?" asked Bress. "I want all the cattle in
Ireland gathered together upon a plain, so that I may choose one of them
for myself." Bress did this; and the Dagda took the black-maned heifer
Angus had told him of. The king, who had expected to be asked very much
more, laughed at what he thought was the Dagda's simplicity. But Angus
had been wise; as will be seen hereafter.

Meanwhile Bress was infuriating the people of the goddess Danu by adding
avarice to tyranny. It was for kings to be liberal to all-comers, but at
the court of Bress no one ever greased his knife with fat, or made his
breath smell of ale. Nor were there ever any poets or musicians or
jugglers or jesters there to give pleasure to the people; for Bress
would distribute no largess. Next, he cut down the very subsistence of
the gods. So scanty was his allowance of food that they began to grow
weak with famine. Ogma, through feebleness, could only carry one-third
of the wood needed for fuel; so that they suffered from cold as well as
from hunger.

It was at this crisis that two physicians, Miach, the son, and Airmid,
the daughter, of Diancecht, the god of medicine, came to the castle
where the dispossessed King Nuada lived. Nuada's porter, blemished, like
himself (for he had lost an eye), was sitting at the gate, and on his
lap was a cat curled up asleep. The porter asked the strangers who they
were. "We are good doctors," they said. "If that is so," he replied,
"perhaps you can give me a new eye." "Certainly," they said, "we could
take one of the eyes of that cat, and put it in the place where your
lost eye used to be." "I should be very pleased if you would do that,"
answered the porter, So Miach and Airmid removed one of the cat's eyes,
and put it in the hollow where the man's eye had been.

The story goes on to say that this was not wholly a benefit to him; for
the eye retained its cat's nature, and, when the man wished to sleep at
nights, the cat's eye was always looking out for mice, while it could
hardly be kept awake during the day. Nevertheless, he was pleased at the
time, and went and told Nuada, who commanded that the doctors who had
performed this marvellous cure should be brought to him.

As they came in, they heard the king groaning, for Nuada's wrist had
festered where the silver hand joined the arm of flesh. Miach asked
where Nuada's own hand was, and they told him that it had been buried
long ago. But he dug it up, and placed it to Nuada's stump; he uttered
an incantation over it, saying: "Sinew to sinew, and nerve to nerve be
joined!" and in three days and nights the hand had renewed itself and
fixed itself to the arm, so that Nuada was whole again.

When Diancecht, Miach's father, heard of this, he was very angry to
think that his son should have excelled him in the art of medicine. He
sent for him, and struck him upon the head with a sword, cutting the
skin, but not wounding the flesh. Miach easily healed this. So Diancecht
hit him again, this time to the bone. Again Miach cured himself. The
third time his father smote him, the sword went right through the skull
to the membrane of the brain, but even this wound Miach was able to
leech. At the fourth stroke, however, Diancecht cut the brain in two,
and Miach could do nothing for that. He died, and Diancecht buried him.
And upon his grave there grew up three hundred and sixty-five stalks of
grass, each one a cure for any illness of each of the three hundred and
sixty-five nerves in a man's body. Airmid, Miach's sister, plucked all
these very carefully, and arranged them on her mantle according to their
properties. But her angry and jealous father overturned the cloak, and
hopelessly confused them. If it had not been for that act, says the
early writer, men would know how to cure every illness, and would so be
immortal.

The healing of Nuada's blemish happened just at the time when all the
people of the goddess Danu had at last agreed that the exactions and
tyranny of Bress could no longer be borne. It was the insult he put upon
Cairpr, son of Ogma the god of literature, that caused things to come
to this head. Poets were always held by the Celts in great honour; and
when Cairpr, the bard of the Tuatha D Danann, went to visit Bress, he
expected to be treated with much consideration, and fed at the king's
own table. But, instead of doing so, Bress lodged him in a small, dark
room where there was no fire, no bed, and no furniture except a mean
table on which small cakes of dry bread were put on a little dish for
his food. The next morning, Cairpr rose early and left the palace
without having spoken to Bress. It was the custom of poets when they
left a king's court to utter a panegyric on their host, but Cairpr
treated Bress instead to a magical satire. It was the first satire ever
made in Ireland, and seems to us to bear upon it all the marks of an
early effort. Roughly rendered, it said:

            "No meat on the plates,
               No milk of the cows;
             No shelter for the belated;
               No money for the minstrels:
             May Bress's cheer be what he gives to others!"

This satire of Cairpr's was, we are assured, so virulent that it caused
great red blotches to break out all over Bress's face. This in itself
constituted a blemish such as should not be upon a king, and the Tuatha
D Danann called upon Bress to abdicate and let Nuada take the throne
again.

Bress was obliged to do so. He went back to the country of the Fomors,
underneath the sea, and complained to his father Elathan, its king,
asking him to gather an army to reconquer his throne. The Fomors
assembled in council-Elathan, Tethra, Balor, Indech, and all the other
warriors and chiefs-and they decided to come with a great host, and take
Ireland away, and put it under the sea where the people of the goddess
Danu would never be able to find it again.

At the same time, another assembly was also being held at Tara, the
capital of the Tuatha D Danann. Nuada was celebrating his return to the
throne by a feast to his people. While it was at its height, a stranger
clothed like a king came to the palace gate. The porter asked him his
name and errand.

"I am called Lugh," he said. "I am the grandson of Diancecht by Cian, my
father, and the grandson of Balor by Ethniu, my mother."

"But what is your profession?" asked the porter; "for no one is admitted
here unless he is a master of some craft."

"I am a carpenter," said Lugh.

"We have no need of a carpenter. We already have a very good one; his
name is Luchtain."

"I am an excellent smith," said Lugh.

"We do not want a smith. We have a very good one; his name is Goibniu."

"I am a professional warrior," said Lugh.

"We have no need of one. Ogma is our champion."

"I am a harpist," said Lugh.

"We have an excellent harpist already."

"I am a warrior renowned for skilfulness rather than for mere strength."

"We already have a man like that."

"I am a poet and tale-teller," said Lugh.

"We have no need of such. We have a most accomplished poet and
tale-teller."

"I am a sorcerer," said Lugh.

"We do not want one. We have numberless sorcerers and druids."

"I am a physician," said Lugh.

"Diancecht is our physician."

"I am a cup-bearer," said Lugh.

"We already have nine of them."

"I am a worker in bronze."

"We have no need of you. We already have a worker in bronze. His name is
Credn."

"Then ask the king," said Lugh, "if he has with him a man who is master
of all these crafts at once, for, if he has, there is no need for me to
come to Tara."

So the door-keeper went inside, and told the king that a man had come
who called himself Lugh the _Ioldanach_[111], or the "Master of all
Arts", and that he claimed to know everything.

The king sent out his best chess-player to play against the stranger.
Lugh won, inventing a new move called "Lugh's enclosure".

Then Nuada invited him in. Lugh entered, and sat down upon the chair
called the "sage's seat", kept for the wisest man.

Ogma, the champion, was showing off his strength. Upon the floor was a
flagstone so large that fourscore yokes of oxen would have been needed
to move it. Ogma pushed it before him along the hall, and out at the
door. Then Lugh rose from his chair, and pushed it back again. But this
stone, huge as it was, was only a portion broken from a still greater
rock outside the palace. Lugh picked it up, and put it back into its
place.

The Tuatha D Danann asked him to play the harp to them. So he played
the "sleep-tune", and the king and all his court fell asleep, and did
not wake until the same hour of the following day. Next he played a
plaintive air, and they all wept. Lastly, he played a measure which sent
them into transports of joy.

When Nuada had seen all these numerous talents of Lugh, he began to
wonder whether one so gifted would not be of great help against the
Fomors. He took counsel with the others, and, by their advice, lent his
throne to Lugh for thirteen days, taking the "sage's seat" at his side.

Lugh summoned all the Tuatha D Danann to a council.

"The Fomors are certainly going to make war on us," he said. "What can
each of you do to help?"

Diancecht the Physician said: "I will completely cure everyone who is
wounded, provided his head is not cut off, or his brain or spinal marrow
hurt."

"I," said Goibniu the Smith, "will replace every broken lance and sword
with a new one, even though the war last seven years. And I will make
the lances so well that they shall never miss their mark, or fail to
kill. Dulb, the smith of the Fomors, cannot do as much as that. The fate
of the fighting will be decided by my lances."

"And I," said Credn the Bronze-worker, "will furnish all the rivets for
the lances, the hilts for the swords, and the rims and bosses for the
shields."

"And I," said Luchtain the Carpenter, "will provide all the shields and
lance-shafts."

Ogma the Champion promised to kill the King of the Fomors, with thrice
nine of his followers, and to capture one-third of his army.

"And you, O Dagda," said Lugh, "what will you do?"

"I will fight," said the Dagda, "both with force and craft. Wherever the
two armies meet, I will crush the bones of the Fomors with my club, till
they are like hailstones under a horse's feet."

"And you, O Morrg?" said Lugh.

"I will pursue them when they flee," she replied. "And I always catch
what I chase."

"And you, O Cairpr, son of Etan?" said Lugh to the poet, "what can you
do?"

"I will pronounce an immediately-effective curse upon them; by one of my
satires I will take away all their honour, and, enchanted by me, they
shall not be able to stand against our warriors."

"And ye, O sorcerers, what will ye do?"

"We will hurl by our magic arts," replied Mathgan, the head sorcerer,
"the twelve mountains of Ireland at the Fomors. These mountains will be
Slieve League, Denna Ulad, the Mourne Mountains, Bri Ruri, Slieve Bloom,
Slieve Snechta, Slemish, Blai-Sliab, Nephin, Sliab Maccu Belgodon,
Segais[112], and Cruachan Aigle[113]".

Then Lugh asked the cup-bearers what they would do.

"We will hide away by magic," they said, "the twelve chief lakes and the
twelve chief rivers of Ireland from the Fomors, so that they shall not
be able to find any water, however thirsty they may be; those waters
will conceal themselves from the Fomors so that they shall not get a
drop, while they will give drink to the people of the goddess Danu as
long as the war lasts, even if it last seven years." And they told Lugh
that the twelve chief lakes were Lough Derg, Lough Luimnigh[114], Lough
Corrib, Lough Ree, Lough Mask, Strangford Lough, Lough Lig, Lough
Neagh, Lough Foyle, Lough Gara, Lough Reagh, and Mrloch, and that the
twelve chief rivers were the Bush, the Boyne, the Bann, the Nem, the
Lee, the Shannon, the Moy, the Sligo, the Erne, the Finn, the Liffey,
and the Suir.

Finally, the Druid, Figol, son of Mamos, said: "I will send three
streams of fire into the faces of the Fomors, and I will take away
two-thirds of their valour and strength, but every breath drawn by the
people of the goddess Danu will only make them more valorous and strong,
so that even if the fighting lasts seven years, they will not be weary
of it."

All decided to make ready for a war, and to give the direction of it to
Lugh.

-----

Footnote 109:

  The principal sources of information for this chapter are the Harleian
  MS. 5280 entitled _The Second Battle of Moytura_, of which
  translations have been made by Dr. Whitley Stokes in the _Revue
  Celtique_ and M. de Jubainville in his _L'pope Celtique en Irlande_,
  and Eugene O'Curry's translation in Vol. IV. of _Atlantis_ of the
  _Fate of the Children of Tuirenn_.

Footnote 110:

  Pronounced _Kian_.

Footnote 111:

  Pronounced _Ildna_.

Footnote 112:

  The Curlieu Hills, between Roscommon and Sligo.

Footnote 113:

  Croagh Patrick.

Footnote 114:

  The estuary of the Shannon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VIII

                          THE GAELIC ARGONAUTS


The preparations for this war are said to have lasted seven years. It
was during the interval that there befel an episode which might almost
be called the "Argonautica" of the Gaelic mythology.[115]

In spite of the dethronement of Bress, the Fomors still claimed their
annual tribute from the tribe of the goddess Danu, and sent their
tax-gatherers, nine times nine in number, to "Balor's Hill" to collect
it. But, while they waited for the gods to come to tender their
submission and their subsidy, they saw a young man approaching them. He
was riding upon "Splendid Mane", the horse of Manannn son of Lr, and
was dressed in Manannn's breastplate and helmet, through which no
weapon could wound their wearer, and he was armed with sword and shield
and poisoned darts. "Like to the setting sun", says the story, "was the
splendour of his countenance and his forehead, and they were not able to
look in his face for the greatness of his splendour." And no wonder! for
he was Lugh the Far-shooter, the new-come sun-god of the Gaels. He fell
upon the Fomorian tax-gatherers, killing all but nine of them, and these
he only spared that they might go back to their kinsmen and tell how the
gods had received them.

There was consternation in the under-sea country. "Who can this terrible
warrior be?" asked Balor. "I know," said Balor's wife; "he must be the
son of our daughter Ethniu; and I foretell that, since he has cast in
his lot with his father's people, we shall never bear rule in Erin
again."

The chiefs of the Fomors saw that this slaughter of their tax-gatherers
signified that the Tuatha D Danann meant fighting. They held a council
to debate on it. There came to it Elathan and Tethra and Indech, kings
of the Fomors; Bress himself, and Balor of the stout blows; Cethlenn the
crooked tooth, Balor's wife; Balor's twelve white-mouthed sons; and all
the chief Fomorian warriors and druids.

Meanwhile, upon earth, Lugh was sending messengers all over Erin to
assemble the Tuatha D Danann. Upon this errand went Lugh's father Cian,
who seems to have been a kind of lesser solar deity,[116] son of
Diancecht, the god of medicine. As Cian was going over the plain of
Muirthemne,[117] he saw three armed warriors approaching him, and, when
they got nearer, he recognized them as the three sons of Tuirenn, son of
Ogma, whose names were Brian, Iuchar, and Iucharba. Between these three
and Cian, with his brothers Ceth and Cu, there was, for some reason, a
private enmity. Cian saw that he was now at a disadvantage. "If my
brothers were with me," he said to himself, "what a fight we would make;
but, as I am alone, it will be best for me to conceal myself." Looking
round, he saw a herd of pigs feeding on the plain. Like all the gods, he
had the faculty of shape-shifting; so, striking himself with a magic
wand, he changed himself into a pig, joined the herd, and began feeding
with them.

But he had been seen by the sons of Tuirenn. "What has become of the
warrior who was walking on the plain a moment ago?" said Brian to his
brothers. "We saw him then," they replied, "but we do not know where he
is now." "Then you have not used the proper vigilance which is needed in
time of war," said the elder brother. "However, I know what has become
of him. He has struck himself with a druidical wand, and changed himself
into a pig, and there he is, in that herd, rooting up the ground, just
like all the other pigs. I can also tell you who he is. His name is
Cian, and you know that he is no friend of ours."

"It is a pity that he has taken refuge among the pigs," they replied,
"for they belong to some one of the Tuatha D Danann, and, even if we
were to kill them all, Cian might still escape us."

Again Brian reproached his brothers. "You are very ignorant," he said,
"if you cannot distinguish a magical beast from a natural beast.
However, I will show you." And thereupon he struck his two brothers with
his own wand of shape-changing, and turned them into two swift, slender
hounds, and set them upon the pigs.

The magic hounds soon found the magic pig, and drove it out of the herd
on to the open plain. Then Brian threw his spear, and hit it. The
wounded pig came to a stop. "It was an evil deed of yours, casting that
spear," it cried, in a human voice, "for I am not a pig, but Cian, son
of Diancecht. So give me quarter."

Iuchar and Iucharba would have granted it, and let him go; but their
fiercer brother swore that Cian should be put an end to, even if he came
back to life seven times. So Cian tried a fresh ruse. "Give me leave",
he asked, "only to return to my own shape before you slay me." "Gladly,"
replied Brian, "for I would much rather kill a man than a pig."

So Cian spoke the befitting spell, cast off his pig's disguise, and
stood before them in his own shape. "You will be obliged to spare my
life now," he said. "We will not," replied Brian. "Then it will be the
worst day's work for all of you that you ever did in your lives," he
answered; "for, if you had killed me in the shape of a pig, you would
only have had to pay the value of a pig, but if you kill me now, I tell
you that there never has been, and there never will be, anyone killed in
this world for whose death a greater blood-fine will be exacted than for
mine."

But the sons of Tuirenn would not listen to him. They slew him, and
pounded his body with stones until it was a crushed mass. Six times they
tried to bury him, and the earth cast him back in horror; but, the
seventh time, the mould held him, and they put stones upon him to keep
him down. They left him buried there, and went to Tara.

Meanwhile Lugh had been expecting his father's return. As he did not
come, he determined to go and look for him. He traced him to the Plain
of Muirthemne, and there he was at fault. But the indignant earth
itself, which had witnessed the murder, spoke to Lugh, and told him
everything. So Lugh dug up his father's corpse, and made certain how he
had come to his death; then he mourned over him, and laid him back in
the earth, and heaped a barrow over him, and set up a pillar with his
name on it in "ogam".[118]

He went back to Tara, and entered the great hall. It was filled with the
people of the goddess Danu, and among them Lugh saw the three sons of
Tuirenn. So he shook the "chiefs' chain", with which the Gaels used to
ask for a hearing in an assembly, and when all were silent, he said:

"People of the goddess Danu, I ask you a question. What would be the
vengeance that any of you would take upon one who had murdered his
father?"

A great astonishment fell upon them, and Nuada, their king, said:
"Surely it is not your father that has been murdered?"

"It is," replied Lugh. "And I am looking at those who murdered him; and
they know how they did it better than I do."

Then Nuada declared that nothing short of hewing the murderer of his
father limb from limb would satisfy him, and all the others said the
same, including the sons of Tuirenn.

"The very ones who did the deed say that," cried Lugh. "Then let them
not leave the hall till they have settled with me about the blood-fine
to be paid for it."

"If it was I who had killed your father," said the king, "I should think
myself lucky if you were willing to accept a fine instead of vengeance."

The sons of Tuirenn took counsel together in whispers. Iuchar and
Iucharba were in favour of admitting their guilt, but Brian was afraid
that, if they confessed, Lugh would withdraw his offer to accept a fine,
and would demand their deaths. So he stood out, and said that, though it
was not they who had killed Cian, yet, sooner than remain under Lugh's
anger, as he suspected them, they would pay the same fine as if they
had.

"Certainly you shall pay the fine," said Lugh, "and I will tell you what
it shall be. It is this: three apples; and a pig's-skin; and a spear;
and two horses and a chariot; and seven pigs; and a hound-whelp; and a
cooking-spit; and three shouts on a hill: that is the fine, and, if you
think it is too much, I will remit some of it, but, if you do not think
it is too much, then pay it."

"If it were a hundred times that," replied Brian, "we should not think
it too much. Indeed, it seems so little that I fear there must be some
treachery concealed in it."

"I do not think it too little," replied Lugh. "Give me your pledge
before the people of the goddess Danu that you will pay it faithfully,
and I will give you mine that I will ask no more."

So the sons of Tuirenn bound themselves before the Tuatha D Danann to
pay the fine to Lugh.

When they had sworn, and given sureties, Lugh turned to them again. "I
will now", he said, "explain to you the nature of the fine you have
pledged yourselves to pay me, so that you may know whether it is too
little or not." And, with foreboding hearts, the sons of Tuirenn set
themselves to listen.

"The three apples that I have demanded," he began, "are three apples
from the Garden of the Hesperides, in the east of the world. You will
know them by three signs. They are the size of the head of a month-old
child, they are of the colour of burnished gold, and they taste of
honey. Wounds are healed and diseases cured by eating them, and they do
not diminish in any way by being eaten. Whoever casts one of them hits
anything he wishes, and then it comes back into his hand. I will accept
no other apples instead of these. Their owners keep them perpetually
guarded because of a prophecy that three young warriors from the west of
the world will come to take them by force, and, brave as you may be, I
do not think that you will ever get them.

"The pig's-skin that I have demanded is the pig's-skin of Tuis, King of
Greece. It has two virtues: its touch perfectly cures all wounded or
sick persons if only there is any life still left in them; and every
stream of water through which it passes is turned into wine for nine
days. I do not think that you will get it from the King of Greece,
either with his consent or without it.

"And can you guess what spear it is that I have demanded?" asked Lugh.
"We cannot," they said. "It is the poisoned spear of Pisear[119], King
of Persia; it is irresistible in battle; it is so fiery that its blade
must always be held under water, lest it destroy the city in which it is
kept. You will find it very difficult to obtain.

"And the two horses and the chariot are the two wonderful horses of
Dobhar[120], King of Sicily, which run equally well over land and sea;
there are no other horses in the world like them, and no other vehicle
equal to the chariot.

"And the seven pigs are the pigs of Easal[121], King of the Golden
Pillars; though they may be killed every night, they are found alive
again the next day, and every person that eats part of them can never be
afflicted with any disease.

"And the hound-whelp I claim is the hound-whelp of the King of
Ioruaidhe[122]; her name is Failinis; every wild beast she sees she
catches at once. It will not be easy for you to secure her.

"The cooking-spit which you must get for me is one of the cooking-spits
of the women of the Island of Fianchuiv[123], which is at the bottom of
the sea, between Erin and Alba.

"You have also pledged yourselves to give three shouts upon a hill. The
hill upon which they must be given is the hill called Cnoc
Miodhchaoin[124], in the north of Lochlann[125]. Miodhchaoin and his
sons do not allow shouts to be given on that hill; besides this, it was
they who gave my father his military education, and, even if I were to
forgive you, they would not; so that, though you achieve all the other
adventures, I think that you will fail in this one.

"Now you know what sort of a fine it is that you have bargained to pay
me," said Lugh.

And fear and astonishment fell upon the sons of Tuirenn.

This tale is evidently the work of some ancient Irish story-teller who
wished to compile from various sources a more or less complete account
of how the Gaelic gods obtained their legendary possessions. The spear
of Pisear, King of Persia, is obviously the same weapon as the lance of
Lugh, which another tradition describes as having been brought by the
Tuatha D Danann from their original home in the city of Gorias;[126]
Failinis, the whelp of the King of Ioruaidhe, is Lugh's "hound of
mightiest deeds", which was irresistible in battle, and which turned any
running water it bathed in into wine,[127] a property here transferred
to the magic pig's-skin of King Tuis: the seven swine of the King of the
Golden Pillars must be the same undying porkers from whose flesh
Manannn mac Lir made the "Feast of Age" which preserved the eternal
youth of the gods;[128] it was with horses and chariot that ran along
the surface of the sea that Manannn used to journey to and fro between
Erin and the Celtic Elysium in the West;[129] the apples that grew in
the Garden of the Hesperides were surely of the same celestial growth as
those that fed the inhabitants of that immortal country;[130] while the
cooking-spit reminds us of three such implements at Tara, made by
Goibniu and associated with the names of the Dagda and the Morrg.[131]

The burden of collecting all these treasures was placed upon the
shoulders of the three sons of Tuirenn.

They consulted together, and agreed that they could never hope to
succeed unless they had Manannn's magic horse, "Splendid Mane", and
Manannn's magic coracle, "Wave-sweeper". But both these had been lent
by Manannn to Lugh himself. So the sons of Tuirenn were obliged to
humble themselves to beg them from Lugh. The sun-god would not lend them
the horse, for fear of making their task too easy, but he let them have
the boat, because he knew how much the spear of Pisear and the horses of
Dobhar would be needed in the coming war with the Fomors. They bade
farewell to their father, and went down to the shore and put out to sea,
taking their sister with them.

"Which portion of the fine shall we seek first?" said the others to
Brian. "We will seek them in the order in which they were demanded," he
replied. So they directed the magic boat to sail to the Garden of the
Hesperides, and presently they arrived there.

They landed at a harbour, and held a council of war. It was decided that
their best chance of obtaining three of the apples would be by taking
the shapes of hawks. Thus they would have strength enough in their claws
to carry the apples away, together with sufficient quickness upon the
wing to hope to escape the arrows, darts, and sling-stones which would
be shot and hurled at them by the warders of the garden.

They swooped down upon the orchard from above. It was done so swiftly
that they carried off the three apples, unhit either by shaft or stone.
But their difficulties were not yet over. The king of the country had
three daughters who were well skilled in witchcraft. By sorcery they
changed themselves into three ospreys, and pursued the three hawks. But
the sons of Tuirenn reached the shore first, and, changing themselves
into swans, dived into the sea. They came up close to their coracle, and
got into it, and sailed swiftly away with the spoil.

Thus their first quest was finished, and they voyaged on to Greece, to
seek the pig's-skin of King Tuis. No one could go without some excuse
into a king's court, so they decided to disguise themselves as poets,
and to tell the door-keeper that they were professional bards from Erin,
seeking largess at the hands of kings. The porter let them into the
great hall, where the poets of Greece were singing before the king.

When those had all finished, Brian rose, and asked permission to show
his art. This was accorded; and he sang:

             "O Tuis, we conceal not thy fame.
              We praise thee as the oak above the kings;
              The skin of a pig, bounty without hardness!
              This is the reward which I ask for it.

             "A stormy host and raging sea
              Are a dangerous power, should one oppose it.
              The skin of a pig, bounty without hardness!
              This is the reward I ask, O Tuis."

"That is a good poem," said the king, "only I do not understand it."

"I will explain it," said Brian. "_We praise thee as the oak above the
kings_'; this means that, as the oak excels all other trees, so do you
excel all other kings in nobility and generosity. _The skin of a pig,
bounty without hardness_'; that is a pig's-skin which you have, O Tuis,
and which I should like to receive as the reward of my poem. _A stormy
host and raging sea are a dangerous power, should one oppose it_'; this
means to say, that we are not used to going without anything on which we
have set our hearts, O Tuis."

"I should have liked your poem better," replied the king, "if my
pig's-skin had not been mentioned in it. It was not a wise thing for you
to have done, O poet. But I will measure three fills of red gold out of
the skin, and you shall have those."

"May all good be thine, O King!" answered Brian. "I knew that I should
get a noble reward."

So the king sent for the pig's-skin to measure out the gold with. But,
as soon as Brian saw it, he seized it with his left hand, and slew the
man who was holding it, and Iuchar and Iucharba also hacked about them;
and they cut their way down to the boat, leaving the King of Greece
among the dead behind them.

"And now we will go and get King Pisear's spear," said Brian. So,
leaving Greece, they sailed in their coracle to Persia.

Their plan of disguising themselves as poets had served them so well
that they decided to make use of it again. So they went into the King of
Persia's hall in the same way as they had entered that of the King of
Greece. Brian first listened to the poets of Persia singing; then he
sang his own song:

              "Small the esteem of any spear with Pisear;
               The battles of foes are broken;
               No oppression to Pisear;
               Everyone whom he wounds.

              "A yew-tree, the finest of the wood,
               It is called King without opposition.
               May that splendid shaft drive on
               Yon crowd into their wounds of death."

"That is a good poem, O man of Erin," said the king, "but why is my
spear mentioned in it?"

"The meaning is this," replied Brian: "I should like to receive that
spear as a reward for my poem."

"You make a rash request," said the king. "If I spare your life after
having heard it, it will be a sufficient reward for your poem."

Brian had one of the magic apples in his hand, and he remembered its
boomerang-like quality. He hurled it full in the King of Persia's face,
dashing out his brains. The Persians flew to arms, but the three sons of
Tuirenn conquered them, and made them yield up the spear.

They had now to travel to Sicily, to obtain the horses and chariot of
King Dobhar. But they were afraid to go as poets this time, for fear the
fame of their deeds might have got abroad. They therefore decided to
pretend to be mercenary soldiers from Erin, and offer the King of Sicily
their service. This, they thought, would be the easiest way of finding
out where the horses and the chariot were kept. So they went and stood
on the green before the royal court.

When the King of Sicily heard that there had come mercenaries from Erin,
seeking wages from the kings of the world, he invited them to take
service with him. They agreed; but, though they stayed with him a
fortnight and a month, they never saw the horses, or even found out
where they were kept. So they went to the king, and announced that they
wished to leave him.

"Why?" he asked, for he did not want them to go.

"We will tell you, O King!" replied Brian. "It is because we have not
been honoured with your confidence, as we have been accustomed with
other kings. You have two horses and a chariot, the best in the world,
and we have not even been allowed to see them."

"I would have shown them to you on the first day if you had asked me,"
said the king; "and you shall see them at once, for I have seldom had
warriors with me so good as you are, and I do not wish you to leave me."

So he sent for the steeds, and had them yoked to the chariot, and the
sons of Tuirenn were witnesses of their marvellous speed, and how they
could run equally well over land or water.

Brian made a sign to his brothers, and they watched their opportunity
carefully, and, as the chariot passed close beside them, Brian leaped
into it, hurling its driver over the side. Then, turning the horses, he
struck King Dobhar with Pisear's spear, and killed him. He took his two
brothers up into the chariot and they drove away.

By the time the sons of Tuirenn reached the country of Easal, King of
the Pillars of Gold, rumour had gone before them. The king came down to
the harbour to meet them, and asked them if it were really true that so
many kings had fallen at their hands. They replied that it was true, but
that they had no quarrel with any of them; only they must obtain at all
costs the fine demanded by Lugh. Then Easal asked them why they had come
to his land, and they told him that they needed his seven pigs to add to
the tribute. So Easal thought it better to give them up, and to make
friends with the three sons of Tuirenn, than to fight with such
warriors. The sons of Tuirenn were very glad at this, for they were
growing weary of battles.

It happened that the King of Ioruaidhe, who had the hound-whelp that
Lugh had demanded, was the husband of King Easal's daughter. Therefore
King Easal did not wish that there should be fighting between him and
the three sons of Tuirenn. He proposed to Brian and his brothers that he
should sail with them to Ioruaidhe, and try to persuade the king of the
country to give up the hound-whelp peacefully. They consented, and all
set foot safely on the "delightful, wonderful shores of Ioruaidhe",[132]
as the manuscript calls them. But King Easal's son-in-law would not
listen to reason. He assembled his warriors, and fought; but the sons of
Tuirenn defeated them, and compelled their king to yield up the
hound-whelp as the ransom for his life.

All these quests had been upon the earth, but the next was harder. No
coracle, not even Manannn's "Wave-sweeper", could penetrate to the
Island of Fianchuiv, in the depths of the sea that severs Erin from
Alba. So Brian left his brothers, and put on his "water-dress, with his
transparency of glass upon his head"-evidently an ancient Irish
anticipation of the modern diver's dress. Thus equipped, he explored the
bottom of the sea for fourteen days before he found the island. But when
at last he reached it, and entered the hall of its queen, she and her
sea-maidens were so amazed at Brian's hardihood in having penetrated to
their kingdom that they presented him with the cooking-spit, and sent
him back safe.

By this time, Lugh had found out by his magic arts that the sons of
Tuirenn had obtained all the treasures he had demanded as the
blood-fine. He desired to get them safely into his own custody before
his victims went to give their three shouts upon Miodhchaoin's Hill. He
therefore wove a druidical spell round them, so that they forgot the
rest of their task altogether, and sailed back to Erin. They searched
for Lugh, to give him the things, but he had gone away, leaving word
that they were to be handed over to Nuada, the Tuatha D Danann king. As
soon as they were in safe-keeping, Lugh came back to Tara and found the
sons of Tuirenn there. And he said to them:

"Do you not know that it is unlawful to keep back any part of a
blood-fine? So have you given those three shouts upon Miodhchaoin's
Hill?"

Then the magic mist of forgetfulness fell from them, and they
remembered. Sorrowfully they went back to complete their task.

Miodhchaoin[133] himself was watching for them, and, when he saw them
land, he came down to the beach. Brian attacked him, and they fought
with the swiftness of two bears and the ferocity of two lions until
Miodhchaoin fell.

Then Miodhchaoin's three sons-Corc, Conn, and Aedh-came out to avenge
their father, and they drove their spears through the bodies of the
three sons of Tuirenn. But the three sons of Tuirenn also drove their
spears through the bodies of the three sons of Miodhchaoin.

The three sons of Miodhchaoin were killed, and the three sons of Tuirenn
were so sorely wounded that birds might have flown through their bodies
from one side to the other. Nevertheless Brian was still able to stand
upright, and he held his two brothers, one in each hand, and kept them
on their feet, and, all together, they gave three faint, feeble shouts.

Their coracle bore them, still living, to Erin. They sent their father
Tuirenn as a suppliant to Lugh, begging him to lend them the magic
pig's-skin to heal their wounds.

But Lugh would not, for he had counted upon their fight with the sons of
Miodhchaoin to avenge his father Cian's death. So the children of
Tuirenn resigned themselves to die, and their father made a farewell
song over them and over himself, and died with them.

Thus ends that famous tale-"The Fate of the Sons of Tuirenn", known as
one of the "Three Sorrowful Stories of Erin".[134]

-----

Footnote 115:

  This story of the _Fate of the Children of Tuirenn_ is mentioned in
  the ninth-century "Cormac's Glossary". It is found in various Irish
  and Scottish MSS., including the Book of Lecan. The present re-telling
  is from Eugene O'Curry's translation, published in _Atlantis_, Vol.
  IV.

Footnote 116:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 390-396.

Footnote 117:

  A part of County Louth, between the Boyne and Dundalk. The heroic
  cycle connects it especially with Cuchulainn. Pronounced _Mrthemna_
  or _Mrhevna_.

Footnote 118:

  There is known to have been a hill called Ard Chein (Cian's Mound) in
  the district of Muirthemne, and O'Curry identifies it tentatively with
  one now called Dromslian.

Footnote 119:

  Pronounced _Pzar_.

Footnote 120:

  Pronounced _Dobar_.

Footnote 121:

  Pronounced _Asal_.

Footnote 122:

  Pronounced _Irda_.

Footnote 123:

  Pronounced _Fincra_.

Footnote 124:

  The _Hill_ (cnoc) _of Midkna_.

Footnote 125:

  A mythical country inhabited by Fomors.

Footnote 126:

  See chap. VI-"The Gods Arrive".

Footnote 127:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 128:

  See chap. VI-"The Gods Arrive".

Footnote 129:

  See chap. XI-"The Gods in Exile".

Footnote 130:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 131:

  Petrie: _Hist. and Antiq. of Tara Hill_.

Footnote 132:

  The country seems to have been identified with Norway or Iceland.

Footnote 133:

  Pronounced _Midkna_.

Footnote 134:

  The other two are "The Fate of the Children of Lr", told in chap. XI,
  and "The Fate of the Sons of Usnach", an episode of the Heroic Cycle,
  related in chap. XIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER IX

                      THE WAR WITH THE GIANTS[135]


By this time the seven years of preparation had come to an end. A week
before the Day of Samhain, the Morrg discovered that the Fomors had
landed upon Erin. She at once sent a messenger to tell the Dagda, who
ordered his druids and sorcerers to go to the ford of the River Unius,
in Sligo, and utter incantations against them.

The people of the goddess Danu, however, were not yet quite ready for
battle. So the Dagda decided to visit the Fomorian camp as an
ambassador, and, by parleying with them, to gain a little more time. The
Fomors received him with apparent courtesy, and, to celebrate his
coming, prepared him a feast of porridge; for it was well-known how fond
he was of such food. They poured into their king's cauldron, which was
as deep as five giant's fists, fourscore gallons of new milk, with meal
and bacon in proportion. To this they added the whole carcasses of
goats, sheep, and pigs; they boiled the mixture together, and poured it
into a hole in the ground. "Now," said they, "if you do not eat it all,
we shall put you to death, for we will not have you go back to your own
people and say that the Fomors are inhospitable." But they did not
succeed in frightening the Dagda. He took his spoon, which was so large
that two persons of our puny size might have reclined comfortably in the
middle of it, dipped it into the porridge, and fished up halves of
salted pork and quarters of bacon.

"If it tastes as good as it smells," he said, "it is good fare." And so
it proved; for he ate it all, and scraped up even what remained at the
bottom of the hole. Then he went away to sleep it off, followed by the
laughter of the Fomors; for his stomach was so swollen with food that he
could hardly walk. It was larger than the biggest cauldron in a large
house, and stood out like a sail before the wind.

But the Fomors' little practical joke upon the Dagda had given the
Tuatha D Danann time to collect their forces. It was on the eve of
Samhain that the two armies came face to face. Even then the Fomors
could not believe that the people of the goddess Danu would offer them
much resistance.

"Do you think they will really dare to give us battle?" said Bress to
Indech, the son of Domnu. "If they do not pay their tribute, we will
pound their bones for them," he replied.

The war of gods and giants naturally mirrored the warfare of the Gaels,
in whose battles, as in those of most semi-barbarous people, single
combat figured largely. The main armies stood still, while, every day,
duels took place between ambitious combatants. But no great warriors
either of the Tuatha D Danann or of the Fomors took part in them.

Sometimes a god, sometimes a giant would be the victor; but there was a
difference in the net results that astonished the Fomors. If their own
swords and lances were broken, they were of no more use, and if their
own champions were killed, they never came back to life again; but it
was quite otherwise with the people of the goddess Danu. Weapons
shattered on one day re-appeared upon the next in as good condition as
though they had never been used, and warriors slain on one day came back
upon the morrow unhurt, and ready, if necessary, to be killed again.

The Fomors decided to send someone to discover the secret of these
prodigies. The spy they chose was Ruadan, the son of Bress and of
Brigit, daughter of the Dagda, and therefore half-giant and half-god. He
disguised himself as a Tuatha D Danann warrior, and went to look for
Goibniu. He found him at his forge, together with Luchtain, the
carpenter, and Credn, the bronze-worker. He saw how Goibniu forged
lance-heads with three blows of his hammer, while Luchtain cut shafts
for them with three blows of his axe, and Credn fixed the two parts
together so adroitly that his bronze nails needed no hammering in. He
went back and told the Fomors, who sent him again, this time to try and
kill Goibniu.

He reappeared at the forge, and asked for a javelin. Without suspicion,
Goibniu gave him one, and, as soon as he got it into his hand, he thrust
it through the smith's body. But Goibniu plucked it out, and, hurling it
back at his assailant, mortally wounded him. Ruadan went home to die,
and his father Bress and his mother Brigit mourned for him, inventing
for the purpose the Irish "keening". Goibniu, on the other hand, took no
harm. He went to the physician Diancecht, who, with his daughter Airmid,
was always on duty at a miraculous well called the "spring of health".
Whenever one of the Tuatha D Danann was killed or wounded, he was
brought to the two doctors, who plunged him into the wonder-working
water, and brought him back to life and health again.

The mystic spring was not long, however, allowed to help the people of
the goddess. A young Fomorian chief, Octriallach son of Indech, found it
out. He and a number of his companions went to it by night, each
carrying a large stone from the bed of the River Drowes. These they
dropped into the spring, until they had filled it, dispersed the healing
water, and formed a cairn above it. Legend has identified this place by
the name of the "Cairn of Octriallach".

This success determined the Fomors to fight a pitched battle. They drew
out their army in line. There was not a warrior in it who had not a coat
of mail and a helmet, a stout spear, a strong buckler, and a heavy
sword. "Fighting the Fomors on that day", says the old author, "could
only be compared to one of three things-beating one's head against a
rock, or plunging it into a fire, or putting one's hand into a serpent's
nest."

All the great fighters of the Tuatha D Danann were drawn out opposite
to them, except Lugh. A council of the gods had decided that his varied
accomplishments made his life too valuable to be risked in battle. They
had, therefore, left him behind, guarded by nine warriors. But, at the
last moment, Lugh escaped from his warders, and appeared in his chariot
before the army. He made them a patriotic speech. "Fight bravely," he
said, "that your servitude may last no longer; it is better to face
death than to live in vassalage and pay tribute." With these encouraging
words, he drove round the ranks, standing on tiptoe, so that all the
Tuatha D Danann might see him.

The Fomors saw him too, and marvelled. "It seems wonderful to me,"[136]
said Bress to his druids, "that the sun should rise in the west to-day
and in the east every other day." "It would be better for us if it were
so," replied the druids. "What else can it be, then?" asked Bress. "It
is the radiance of the face of Lugh of the Long Arms," said they.

Then the two armies charged each other with a great shout. Spears and
lances smote against shields, and so great was the shouting of the
fighters, the shattering of shields, the clattering of swords, the
rattling of quivers, and the whistling of darts and javelins that it
seemed as if thunder rolled everywhere.

They fought so closely that the heads, hands, and feet of those on one
side were touching the heads, hands, and feet of those on the other
side; they shed so much blood on to the ground that it became hard to
stand on it without slipping; and the river of Unsenn was filled with
dead bodies, so hard and swift and bloody and cruel was the battle.

Many great chiefs fell on each side. Ogma, the champion of the Tuatha D
Danann, killed Indech, the son of the goddess Domnu. But, meanwhile,
Balor of the Mighty Blows raged among the gods, slaying their king,
Nuada of the Silver Hand, as well as Macha, one of his warlike wives. At
last he met with Lugh. The sun-god shouted a challenge to his
grandfather in the Fomorian speech. Balor heard it, and prepared to use
his death-dealing eye.

"Lift up my eyelid," he said to his henchmen, "that I may see this
chatterer who talks to me."

The attendants lifted Balor's eye with a hook, and if the glance of the
eye beneath had rested upon Lugh, he would certainly have perished. But,
when it was half opened, Lugh flung a magic stone which struck Balor's
eye out through the back of his head. The eye fell on the ground behind
Balor, and destroyed a whole rank of thrice nine Fomors who were unlucky
enough to be within sight of it.

An ancient poem has handed down the secret of this magic stone. It is
there called a _tathlum_, meaning a "concrete ball" such as the ancient
Irish warriors used sometimes to make out of the brains of dead enemies
hardened with lime.

             "A tathlum, heavy, fiery, firm,
              Which the Tuatha D Danann had with them,
              It was that broke the fierce Balor's eye,
              Of old, in the battle of the great armies.

             "The blood of toads and furious bears,
              And the blood of the noble lion,
              The blood of vipers and of Osmuinn's trunks;-
              It was of these the tathlum was composed.

             "The sand of the swift Armorian sea,
              And the sand of the teeming Red Sea;-
              All these, being first purified, were used
              In the composition of the tathlum.

             "Briun, the son of Bethar, no mean warrior,
              Who on the ocean's eastern border reigned;-
              It was he that fused, and smoothly formed,
              It was he that fashioned the tathlum.

             "To the hero Lugh was given
              This concrete ball,-no soft missile;-
              In Mag Tuireadh of shrieking wails,
              From his hand he threw the tathlum."[137]

This blinding of the terrible Balor turned the fortunes of the fight;
for the Fomors wavered, and the Morrg came and encouraged the people
of the goddess Danu with a song, beginning "Kings arise to the battle",
so that they took fresh heart, and drove the Fomors headlong back to
their country underneath the sea.

Such was the battle which is called in Irish _Mag Tuireadh na
b-Fomorach_, that is to say, the "Plain of the Towers of the Fomors",
and, more popularly, the "Battle of Moytura the Northern", to
distinguish it from the other Battle of Moytura fought by the Tuatha D
Danann against the Fir Bolgs farther to the south. More of the Fomors
were killed in it, says the ancient manuscript, than there are stars in
the sky, grains of sand on the sea-shore, snow-flakes in winter, drops
of dew upon the meadows in spring-time, hailstones during a storm,
blades of grass trodden under horses' feet, or Manannn son of Lr's
white horses, the waves of the sea, when a tempest breaks. The "towers"
or pillars said to mark the graves of the combatants still stand upon
the plain of Carrowmore, near Sligo, and form, in the opinion of Dr.
Petrie, the finest collection of prehistoric monuments in the world,
with the sole exception of Carnac, in Brittany.[138] Megalithic
structures of almost every kind are found among them-stone cairns with
dolmens in their interiors, dolmens standing open and alone, dolmens
surrounded by one, two, or three circles of stones, and circles without
dolmens-to the number of over a hundred. Sixty-four of such prehistoric
remains stand together upon an elevated plateau not more than a mile
across, and make the battle-field of Moytura, though the least known,
perhaps the most impressive of all primeval ruins. What they really
commemorated we may never know, but, in all probability, the place was
the scene of some important and decisive early battle, the monuments
marking the graves of the chieftains who were interred as the result of
it. Those which have been examined were found to contain burnt wood and
the half-burnt bones of men and horses, as well as implements of flint
and bone. The actors, therefore, were still in the Neolithic Age.
Whether the horses were domesticated ones buried with their riders, or
wild ones eaten at the funeral feasts, it would be hard to decide. The
history of the real event must have been long lost even at the early
date when its relics were pointed out as the records of a battle between
the gods and the giants of Gaelic myth.

The Tuatha D Danann, following the routed Fomors, overtook and captured
Bress. He begged Lugh to spare his life.

"What ransom will you pay for it?" asked Lugh.

"I will guarantee that the cows of Ireland shall always be in milk,"
promised Bress.

But, before accepting, Lugh took counsel with his druids.

"What good will that be," they decided, "if Bress does not also lengthen
the lives of the cows?"

This was beyond the power of Bress to do; so he made another offer.

"Tell your people," he said to Lugh, "that, if they will spare my life,
they shall have a good wheat harvest every year."

But they said: "We already have the spring to plough and sow in, the
summer to ripen the crops, the autumn for reaping, and the winter in
which to eat the bread; and that is all we want."

Lugh told this to Bress. But he also said: "You shall have your life in
return for a much less service to us than that."

"What is it?" asked Bress.

"Tell us when we ought to plough, when we ought to sow, and when we
ought to harvest."

Bress replied: "You should plough on a Tuesday, sow on a Tuesday, and
harvest on a Tuesday."

And this lying maxim (says the story) saved Bress's life.

Lugh, the Dagda, and Ogma still pursued the Fomors, who had carried off
in their flight the Dagda's harp. They followed them into the submarine
palace where Bress and Elathan lived, and there they saw the harp
hanging on the wall. This harp of the Dagda's would not play without its
owner's leave. The Dagda sang to it:

              "Come, oak of the two cries!
               Come, hand of fourfold music!
               Come, summer! Come, winter!
               Voice of harps, bellows[139], and flutes!"

For the Dagda's harp had these two names; it was called "Oak of the two
cries" and "Hand of fourfold music".

It leaped down from the wall, killing nine of the Fomors as it passed,
and came into the Dagda's hand. The Dagda played to the Fomors the three
tunes known to all clever harpists-the weeping-tune, the laughing-tune,
and the sleeping-tune. While he played the weeping-tune, they were bowed
with weeping; while he played the laughing-tune, they rocked with
laughter; and when he played the sleeping-tune, they all fell asleep.
And while they slept, Lugh, the Dagda, and Ogma got away safely.

Next, the Dagda brought the black-maned heifer which he had, by the
advice of Angus son of the Young, obtained from Bress. The wisdom of
Angus had been shown in this advice, for it was this very heifer that
the cattle of the people of the goddess Danu were accustomed to follow,
whenever it lowed. Now, when it lowed, all the cattle which the Fomors
had taken away from the Tuatha D Danann came back again.

Yet the power of the Fomors was not wholly broken. Four of them still
carried on a desultory warfare by spoiling the corn, fruit, and milk of
their conquerors. But the Morrg and Badb and Mider and Angus pursued
them, and drove them out of Ireland for ever.[140]

Last of all, the Morrg and Badb went up on to the summits of all the
high mountains of Ireland, and proclaimed the victory. All the lesser
gods who had not been in the battle came round and heard the news. And
Badb sang a song which began:

                     "Peace mounts to the heavens,
                      The heavens descend to earth,
                      Earth lies under the heavens,
                      Everyone is strong ...",

but the rest of it has been lost and forgotten.

Then she added a prophecy in which she foretold the approaching end of
the divine age, and the beginning of a new one in which summers would be
flowerless and cows milkless and women shameless and men strengthless,
in which there would be trees without fruit and seas without fish, when
old men would give false judgments and legislators make unjust laws,
when warriors would betray one another, and men would be thieves, and
there would be no more virtue left in the world.

-----

Footnote 135:

  This chapter is, with slight interpolations, based upon the Harleian
  MS. in the British Museum numbered 5280, and called the _Second Battle
  of Moytura_, or rather from translations made of it by Dr. Whitley
  Stokes, published in the _Revue Celtique_, Vol. XII, and by M. de
  Jubainville in his _L'pope Celtique en Irlande_.

Footnote 136:

  I have interpolated this picturesque passage from the account of a
  fight between the Tuatha D Danann and the Fomors in the "Fate of the
  Children of Tuirenn". O'Curry's translation in _Atlantis_, Vol. IV.

Footnote 137:

  This translation was made by Eugene O'Curry from an ancient vellum MS.
  formerly belonging to Mr. W. Monck Mason, but since sold by auction in
  London. See his _Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish_, Lecture
  XII, p. 252.

Footnote 138:

  See Fergusson: _Rude Stone Monuments_, pp. 180, &c.

Footnote 139:

  ? Bagpipes.

Footnote 140:

  _Book of Fermoy._ See _Revue Celtique_, Vol. I.-"The Ancient Irish
  Goddess of War".

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER X

                  THE CONQUEST OF THE GODS BY MORTALS


Of what Badb had in mind when she uttered this prophecy we have no
record. But it was true. The twilight of the Irish gods was at hand. A
new race was coming across the sea to dispute the ownership of Ireland
with the people of the goddess Danu. And these new-comers were not
divinities like themselves, but men like ourselves, ancestors of the
Gaels.

This story of the conquest of the gods by mortals-which seems such a
strange one to us-is typically Celtic. The Gaelic mythology is the only
one which has preserved it in any detail; but the doctrine would seem to
have been common at one time to all the Celts. It was, however, of less
shame to the gods than would otherwise have been; for men were of as
divine descent as themselves. The dogma of the Celts was that men were
descended from the god of death, and first came from the Land of the
Dead to take possession of the present world.[141] Caesar tells us, in
his too short account of the Gauls, that they believed themselves to be
sprung from Dis Pater, the god of the underworld.[142] In the Gaelic
mythology Dis Pater was called Bil, a name which has for root the
syllable _bel_, meaning "to die". The god Beli in British mythology was
no doubt the same person, while the same idea is expressed by the same
root in the name of Balor, the terrible Fomor whose glance was
death.[143]

The post-Christian Irish chroniclers, seeking to reconcile Christian
teachings with the still vital pagan mythology by changing the gods into
ancient kings and incorporating them into the annals of the country,
with appropriate dates, also disposed of the genuine early doctrine by
substituting Spain for Hades, and giving a highly-fanciful account of
the origin and wanderings of their ancestors. To use a Hibernicism,
appropriate in this connection, the first Irishman was a Scythian called
Fenius Farsa. Deprived of his own throne, he had settled in Egypt, where
his son Niul married a daughter of the reigning Pharaoh. Her name was
Scta, and she had a son called Goidel, whose great-grandson was named
Eber Scot, the whole genealogy being probably invented to explain the
origin of the three names by which the Gaels called themselves-Finn,
Scot, and Goidel. Fenius and his family and clan were turned out of
Egypt for refusing to join in the persecution of the children of Israel,
and sojourned in Africa for forty-two years. Their wanderings took them
to "the altars of the Philistines, by the Lake of Osiers"; then, passing
between Rusicada and the hilly country of Syria, they travelled through
Mauretania as far as the Pillars of Hercules; and thence landed in
Spain, where they lived many years, greatly increasing and multiplying.
The same route is given by the twelfth-century British historian,
Geoffrey of Monmouth, as that taken by Brutus and the Trojans when they
came to colonize Britain.[144] Its only connection with any kind of fact
is that it corresponds fairly well with what ethnologists consider must
have been the westward line of migration taken, not, curiously enough,
by the Aryan Celts, but by the pre-Aryan Iberians.

It is sufficient for us to find the first men in Spain, remembering that
"Spain" stood for the Celtic Hades, or Elysium. In this country Bregon,
the father of two sons, Bil and Ith, had built a watch-tower, from
which, one winter's evening, Ith saw, far off over the seas, a land he
had never noticed before. "It is on winter evenings, when the air is
pure, that man's eyesight reaches farthest", remarks the old tract
called the "Book of Invasions",[145] gravely accounting for the fact
that Ith saw Ireland from Spain.

Wishing to examine it nearer, he set sail with thrice thirty warriors,
and landed without mishap at the mouth of the River Scn.[146] The
country seemed to him to be uninhabited, and he marched with his men
towards the north. At last he reached Aileach, near the present town of
Londonderry.

Here he found the three reigning kings of the people of the goddess
Danu, Mac Cuill, Mac Cecht, and Mac Grein, the sons of Ogma, and
grandsons of the Dagda. These had succeeded Nuada the Silver-handed,
killed in the battle with the Fomors; and had met, after burying their
predecessor in a tumulus called Grianan Aileach, which still stands on
the base of the Inishowen Peninsula, between Lough Swilly and Lough
Foyle, to divide his kingdom among them. Unable to arrive at any
partition satisfactory to all, they appealed to the new-comer to
arbitrate.

The advice of Ith was moral rather than practical. "Act according to the
laws of justice" was all that he would say to the claimants; and then he
was indiscreet enough to burst into enthusiastic praises of Ireland for
its temperate climate and its richness in fruit, honey, wheat, and fish.
Such sentiments from a foreigner seemed to the Tuatha D Danann
suggestive of a desire to take the country from them. They conspired
together and treacherously killed Ith at a place since called "Ith's
Plain". They, however, spared his followers, who returned to "Spain",
taking their dead leader's body with them. The indignation there was
great, and Mil, Bil's son and Ith's nephew, determined to go to
Ireland and get revenge.

Mil therefore sailed with his eight sons and their wives. Thirty-six
chiefs, each with his shipful of warriors, accompanied him. By the magic
arts of their druid, Amergin of the Fair Knee, they discovered the exact
place at which Ith had landed before them, and put in to shore there.
Two alone failed to reach it alive. The wife of Amergin died during the
voyage, and Aranon, a son of Mil, on approaching the land, climbed to
the top of the mast to obtain a better view, and, falling off, was
drowned. The rest disembarked safely upon the first of May.

Amergin was the first to land. Planting his right foot on Irish soil, he
burst into a poem preserved in both the Book of Lecan and the Book of
Ballymote.[147] It is a good example of the pantheistic philosophy of
the Celtic races, and a very close parallel to it is contained in an
early Welsh poem, called the "Battle of the Trees", and attributed to
the famous bard Taliesin.[148] "I am the wind that blows upon the sea,"
sang Amergin; "I am the ocean wave; I am the murmur of the surges; I am
seven battalions; I am a strong bull; I am an eagle on a rock; I am a
ray of the sun; I am the most beautiful of herbs; I am a courageous wild
boar; I am a salmon in the water; I am a lake upon a plain; I am a
cunning artist; I am a gigantic, sword-wielding champion; I can shift my
shape like a god. In what direction shall we go? Shall we hold our
council in the valley or on the mountain-top? Where shall we make our
home? What land is better than this island of the setting sun? Where
shall we walk to and fro in peace and safety? Who can find you clear
springs of water as I can? Who can tell you the age of the moon but I?
Who can call the fish from the depths of the sea as I can? Who can cause
them to come near the shore as I can? Who can change the shapes of the
hills and headlands as I can? I am a bard who is called upon by
seafarers to prophesy. Javelins shall be wielded to avenge our wrongs. I
prophesy victory. I end my song by prophesying all other good
things."[149]

The Welsh bard Taliesin sings in the same strain as the druid Amergin
his unity with, and therefore his power over, all nature, animate and
inanimate. "I have been in many shapes", he says, "before I attained a
congenial form. I have been a narrow blade of a sword; I have been a
drop in the air; I have been a shining star; I have been a word in a
book; I have been a book in the beginning; I have been a light in a
lantern a year and a half; I have been a bridge for passing over
threescore rivers; I have journeyed as an eagle; I have been a boat on
the sea; I have been a director in battle; I have been a sword in the
hand; I have been a shield in fight; I have been the string of a harp; I
have been enchanted for a year in the foam of water. There is nothing in
which I have not been." It is strange to find Gael and Briton combining
to voice almost in the same words this doctrine of the mystical Celts,
who, while still in a state of semi-barbarism, saw, with some of the
greatest of ancient and modern philosophers, the One in the Many, and a
single Essence in all the manifold forms of life.

The Milesians (for so, following the Irish annalists, it will be
convenient to call the first Gaelic settlers in Ireland) began their
march on Tara, which was the capital of the Tuatha D Danann, as it had
been in earlier days the chief fortress of the Fir Bolgs, and would in
later days be the dwelling of the high kings of Ireland. On their way
they met with a goddess called Banba, the wife of Mac Cuill. She greeted
Amergin. "If you have come to conquer Ireland," she said, "your cause is
no just one." "Certainly it is to conquer it we have come," replied
Amergin, without condescending to argue upon the abstract morality of
the matter. "Then at least grant me one thing," she asked. "What is
that?" replied Amergin. "That this island shall be called by my name."
"It shall be," replied Amergin.

A little farther on, they met a second goddess, Fotla, the wife of Mac
Cecht, who made the same request, and received the same answer from
Amergin.

Last of all, at Uisnech, the centre of Ireland, they came upon the third
of the queens, Eriu, the wife of Mac Grein. "Welcome, warriors," she
cried. "To you who have come from afar this island shall henceforth
belong, and from the setting to the rising sun there is no better land.
And your race will be the most perfect the world has ever seen." "These
are fair words and a good prophecy," said Amergin. "It will be no thanks
to you," broke in Donn, Mil's eldest son. "Whatever success we have we
shall owe to our own strength." "That which I prophesy has no concern
with you," retorted the goddess, "and neither you nor your descendants
will live to enjoy this island." Then, turning to Amergin, she, too,
asked that Ireland might be called after her. "It shall be its principal
name," Amergin promised.

And so it has happened. Of the three ancient names of Ireland-Banba,
Fotla, and Eriu-the last, in its genitive form of "Erinn", is the one
that has survived.

The invaders came to Tara, then called Drumcain, that is, the "Beautiful
Hill". Mac Cuill, Mac Cecht, and Mac Grein met them, with all the host
of the Gaelic gods. As was usual, they held a parley. The people of the
goddess Danu complained that they had been taken by surprise, and the
Milesians admitted that to invade a country without having first warned
its inhabitants was not strictly according to the courtesies of
chivalrous warfare. The Tuatha D Danann proposed to the invaders that
they should leave the island for three days, during which they
themselves would decide whether to fight for their kingdom or to
surrender it; but the Milesians did not care for this, for they knew
that, as soon as they were out of the island, the Tuatha D Danann would
oppose them with druidical enchantments, so that they would not be able
to make a fresh landing. In the end, Mac Cuill, Mac Cecht, and Mac
Grein offered to submit the matter to the arbitration of Amergin, the
Milesians' own lawgiver, with the express stipulation that, if he gave
an obviously partial judgment, he was to suffer death at their hands.
Donn asked his druid if he were prepared to accept this very delicate
duty. Amergin replied that he was, and at once delivered the first
judgment pronounced by the Milesians in Ireland.

 "The men whom we found dwelling in the land, to them is possession due
    by right.
  It is therefore your duty to set out to sea over nine green waves;
  And if you shall be able to effect a landing again in spite of them,
  You are to engage them in battle, and I adjudge to you the land in
     which you found them living.
  I adjudge to you the land wherein you found them dwelling, by the right
     of battle.
  But although you may desire the land which these people possess, yet
     yours is the duty to show them justice.
  I forbid you from injustice to those you have found in the land,
     however you may desire to obtain it."[150]

This judgment was considered fair by both parties. The Milesians retired
to their ships, and waited at a distance of nine waves' length from the
land until the signal was given to attack, while the Tuatha D Danann,
drawn up upon the beach, were ready with their druidical spells to
oppose them.

The signal was given, and the Milesians bent to their oars. But they had
hardly started before they discovered that a strong wind was blowing
straight towards them from the shore, so that they could make no
progress. At first they thought it might be a natural breeze, but Donn
smelt magic in it. He sent a man to climb the mast of his ship, and see
if the wind blew as strong at that height as it did at the level of the
sea. The man returned, reporting that the air was quite still "up
aloft". Evidently it was a druidical wind. But Amergin soon coped with
it. Lifting up his voice, he invoked the Land of Ireland itself, a power
higher than the gods it sheltered.

                "I invoke the land of Eriu!
                 The shining, shining sea!
                 The fertile, fertile hill!
                 The wooded vale!
                 The river abundant, abundant in water!
                 The fishful, fishful lake!"

In such strain runs the original incantation, one of those magic
formulas whose power was held by ancient, and still is held by savage,
races to reside in their exact consecrated wording rather than in their
meaning. To us it sounds nonsense, and so no doubt it did to those who
put the old Irish mythical traditions into literary shape; for a later
version expands and explains it as follows:[151]-

     "I implore that we may regain the land of Erin,
      We who have come over the lofty waves,
      This land whose mountains are great and extensive,
      Whose streams are clear and numerous,
      Whose woods abound with various fruit,
      Its rivers and waterfalls are large and beautiful,
      Its lakes are broad and widely spread,
      It abounds with fountains on elevated grounds!
      May we gain power and dominion over its tribes!
      May we have kings of our own ruling at Tara!
      May Tara be the regal residence of our many succeeding kings!
      May the Milesians be the conquerors of its people!
      May our ships anchor in its harbours!
      May they trade along the coast of Erin!
      May Eremon be its first ruling monarch!
      May the descendants of Ir and Eber be mighty kings!
      I implore that we may regain the land of Erin,
                                  I implore!"

The incantation proved effectual. The Land of Ireland was pleased to be
propitious, and the druidical wind dropped down.

But success was not quite so easy as they had hoped. Manannn, son of
the sea and lord of headlands, shook his magic mantle at them, and
hurled a fresh tempest out over the deep. The galleys of the Milesians
were tossed helplessly on the waves; many sank with their crews. Donn
was among the lost, thus fulfilling Eriu's prophecy, and three other
sons of Mil also perished. In the end, a broken remnant, after long
beating about the coasts, came to shore at the mouth of the River Boyne.
They landed; and Amergin, from the shore, invoked the aid of the sea as
he had already done that of the land.

                          "Sea full of fish!
                           Fertile land!
                           Fish swarming up!
                           Fish there!
                           Under-wave bird!
                           Great fish!
                           Crab's hole!
                           Fish swarming up!
                           Sea full of fish!"

which, being interpreted like the preceding charm, seems to have meant:

 "May the fishes of the sea crowd in shoals to the land for our use!
  May the waves of the sea drive forth to the shore abundance of fish!
  May the salmon swim abundantly into our nets!
  May all kinds of fish come plentifully to us from the sea!
  May its flat-fishes also come in abundance!
  This poem I compose at the sea-shore that fishes may swim in shoals to
     our coast."

Then, gathering their forces, they marched on the people of the goddess
Danu.

Two battles were fought, the first in Glenn Faisi, a valley of the
Slieve Mish Mountains, south of Tralee, and the second at Tailtiu, now
called Telltown. In both, the gods were beaten. Their three kings were
killed by the three surviving sons of Mil-Mac Cuill by Eber, Mac Cecht
by Eremon, and Mac Grein by the druid Amergin. Defeated and
disheartened, they gave in, and, retiring beneath the earth, left the
surface of the land to their conquerors.

From this day begins the history of Ireland according to the annalists.
Mil's eldest son, Donn, having perished, the kingdom fell by right to
the second, Eremon. But Eber, the third son, backed by his followers,
insisted upon a partition, and Ireland was divided into two equal parts.
At the end of a year, however, war broke out between the brothers; Eber
was killed in battle, and Eremon took the sole rule.

-----

Footnote 141:

  It may be noted that, according to Welsh legend, the ancestors of the
  Cymri came from Gwld yr Hv, the "Land of Summer", _i.e._ the Celtic
  Other World.

Footnote 142:

  _De Bello Gallico_, Book VI, chap. XVIII.

Footnote 143:

  De Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique_, chap. X. Rhys: _Hibbert
  Lectures_-"The Gaulish Pantheon".

Footnote 144:

  Geoffrey of Monmouth's _Historia Britonum_, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote 145:

  Contained in the _Book of Leinster_ and other ancient manuscripts.

Footnote 146:

  Now called the Kenmare River.

Footnote 147:

  This poem and the three following ones, all attributed to Amergin, are
  said to be the oldest Irish literary records.

Footnote 148:

  _Book of Taliesin_, poem VIII, in Skene's Four Ancient Books of Wales,
  Vol. I, p. 276.

Footnote 149:

  De Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique_. See also the _Transactions of
  the Ossianic Society_, Vol. V.

Footnote 150:

  Translated by Professor Owen Connellan in Vol. V of the _Transactions
  of the Ossianic Society_.

Footnote 151:

  The original versions of this and the following charm are from De
  Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_, the later from Professor
  Owen Connellan's translations in Vol. V of the _Transactions of the
  Ossianic Society_. "Some of these poems", explains the Professor,
  "have been glossed by writers or commentators of the Middle Ages,
  without which it would be almost impossible now for any Irish scholar
  to interpret them; and it is proper to remark that the translation
  accompanying them is more in accordance with this gloss than with the
  original text."

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER XI

                           THE GODS IN EXILE


But though mortals had conquered gods upon a scale unparalleled in
mythology, they had by no means entirely subdued them. Beaten in battle,
the people of the goddess Danu had yet not lost their divine attributes,
and could use them either to help or hurt. "Great was the power of the
Dagda", says a tract preserved in the Book of Leinster, "over the sons
of Mil, even after the conquest of Ireland; for his subjects destroyed
their corn and milk, so that they must needs make a treaty of peace with
the Dagda. Not until then, and thanks to his good-will, were they able
to harvest corn and drink the milk of their cows."[152] The basis of
this lost treaty seems to have been that the Tuatha D Danann, though
driven from the soil, should receive homage and offerings from their
successors. We are told in the verse _dinnsenchus_ of Mag Slecht, that-

           "Since the rule
            Of Eremon, the noble man of grace,
            There was worshipping of stones
            Until the coming of good Patrick of Macha".[153]

Dispossessed of upper earth, the gods had, however, to seek for new
homes. A council was convened, but its members were divided between two
opinions. One section of them chose to shake the dust of Ireland off its
disinherited feet, and seek refuge in a paradise over-seas, situate in
some unknown, and, except for favoured mortals, unknowable island of the
west, the counterpart in Gaelic myth of the British

                      ... "island-valley of Avilion;
            Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
            Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
            Deep-meadow'd, happy, fair with orchard-lawns
            And bowery hollows crown'd with summer sea"[154]

-a land of perpetual pleasure and feasting, described variously as the
"Land of Promise" (_Tir Tairngir_), the "Plain of Happiness" (_Mag
Mell_), the "Land of the Living" (_Tir-nam-beo_), the "Land of the
Young" (_Tir-nan-g_), and "Breasal's Island" (_Hy-Breasail_). Celtic
mythology is full of the beauties and wonders of this mystic country,
and the tradition of it has never died out. Hy-Breasail has been set
down on old maps as a reality again and again;[155] some pioneers in the
Spanish seas thought they had discovered it, and called the land they
found "Brazil"; and it is still said, by lovers of old lore, that a
patient watcher, after long gazing westward from the westernmost shores
of Ireland or Scotland, may sometimes be lucky enough to catch a glimpse
against the sunset of its-

      "summer isles of Eden lying in dark-purple spheres of sea".

Of these divine emigrants the principal was Manannn son of Lr. But,
though he had cast in his lot beyond the seas, he did not cease to visit
Ireland. An old Irish king, Bran, the son of Febal, met him, according
to a seventh-century poem, as Bran journeyed to, and Manannn from, the
earthly paradise. Bran was in his boat, and Manannn was driving a
chariot over the tops of the waves, and he sang:[156]

         "Bran deems it a marvellous beauty
          In his coracle across the clear sea:
          While to me in my chariot from afar
          It is a flowery plain on which he rides about.

         "What is a clear sea
          For the prowed skiff in which Bran is,
          That is a happy plain with profusion of flowers
          To me from the chariot of two wheels.

         "Bran sees
          The number of waves beating across the clear sea:
          I myself see in Mag Mon[157]
          Red-headed flowers without fault.

         "Sea-horses glisten in summer
          As far as Bran has stretched his glance:
          Rivers pour forth a stream of honey
          In the land of Manannn son of Lr.

         "The sheen of the main, on which thou art,
          The white hue of the sea, on which thou rowest about,
          Yellow and azure are spread out,
          It is land, and is not rough.

         "Speckled salmon leap from the womb
          Of the white sea, on which thou lookest:
          They are calves, they are coloured lambs
          With friendliness, without mutual slaughter.

         "Though but one chariot-rider is seen
          In Mag Mell[158] of many flowers,
          There are many steeds on its surface,
          Though them thou seest not.

             *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

         "Along the top of a wood has swum
          Thy coracle across ridges,
          There is a wood of beautiful fruit
          Under the prow of thy little skiff.

         "A wood with blossom and fruit,
          On which is the vine's veritable fragrance;
          A wood without decay, without defect,
          On which are leaves of a golden hue."

And, after this singularly poetical enunciation of the philosophical and
mystical doctrine that all things are, under their diverse forms,
essentially the same, he goes on to describe to Bran the beauties and
pleasures of the Celtic Elysium.

But there were others-indeed, the most part-of the gods who refused to
expatriate themselves. For these residences had to be found, and the
Dagda, their new king, proceeded to assign to each of those who stayed
in Ireland a _sdh_. These _sdhe_ were barrows, or hillocks, each being
the door to an underground realm of inexhaustible splendour and delight,
according to the somewhat primitive ideas of the Celts. A description is
given of one which the Dagda kept for himself, and out of which his son
Angus cheated him, which will serve as a fair example of all. There were
apple-trees there always in fruit, and one pig alive and another ready
roasted, and the supply of ale never failed. One may still visit in
Ireland the _sdhe_ of many of the gods, for the spots are known, and
the traditions have not died out. To Lr was given _Sdh
Fionnachaidh_,[159] now known as the "Hill of the White Field", on the
top of Slieve Fuad, near Newtown Hamilton, in County Armagh. Bodb Derg
received a _sdh_ called by his own name, _Sdh Bodb_[160], just to the
south of Portumna, in Galway. Mider was given the _sdh_ of _Bri Leith_,
now called Slieve Golry, near Ardagh, in County Longford. Ogma's _sdh_
was called _Airceltrai_; to Lugh was assigned _Rodrubn_; Manannn's
son, Ilbhreach, received _Sdh Eas Aedha Ruaidh_[161], now the Mound of
Mullachshee, near Ballyshannon, in Donegal; Fionnbharr[162] had _Sdh
Meadha_, now "Knockma", about five miles west of Tuam, where, as present
king of the fairies, he is said to live to-day; while the abodes of
other gods of lesser fame are also recorded. For himself the Dagda
retained two, both near the River Boyne, in Meath, the best of them
being the famous Brugh-na-Boyne. None of the members of the Tuatha D
Danann were left unprovided for, save one.

It was from this time that the Gaelic gods received the name by which
the peasantry know them to-day-_Aes Sdhe_, the "People of the Hills",
or, more shortly, the _Sdhe_. Every god, or fairy, is a
_Fer-Sdhe_[163], a "Man of the Hill"; and every goddess a _Bean-Sdhe_,
a "Woman of the Hill", the _banshee_ of popular legend.[164]

The most famous of such fairy hills are about five miles from
Drogheda.[165] They are still connected with the names of the Tuatha D
Danann, though they are now not called their dwelling-places, but their
tombs. On the northern bank of the Boyne stand seventeen barrows, three
of which-Knowth, Dowth, and New Grange-are of great size. The last
named, largest, and best preserved, is over 300 feet in diameter, and 70
feet high, while its top makes a platform 120 feet across. It has been
explored, and Roman coins, gold torques, copper pins, and iron rings and
knives have been found in it; but what else it may have once contained
will never be known, for, like Knowth and Dowth, it was thoroughly
ransacked by Danish spoilers in the ninth century. It is entered by a
square doorway, the rims of which are elaborately ornamented with a kind
of spiral pattern. This entrance leads to a stone passage, more than 60
feet long, which gradually widens and rises, until it opens into a
chamber with a conical dome 20 feet high. On each side of this central
chamber is a recess, with a shallow oval stone basin in it. The huge
slabs of which the whole is built are decorated upon both the outer and
the inner faces with the same spiral pattern as the doorway.

The origin of these astonishing prehistoric monuments is unknown, but
they are generally attributed to the race that inhabited Ireland before
the Celts. Gazing at marvellous New Grange, one might very well echo the
words of the old Irish poet Mac Nia, in the Book of Ballymote:

          "Behold the _Sdh_ before your eyes,
           It is manifest to you that it is a king's mansion,
           Which was built by the firm Dagda,
           It was a wonder, a court, an admirable hill."[166]

It is not, however, with New Grange, or even with Knowth or Dowth, that
the Dagda's name is now associated. It is a smaller barrow, nearer to
the Boyne, which is known as the "Tomb of the Dagda". It has never been
opened, and Dr. James Fergusson, the author of _Rude Stone Monuments_,
who holds the Tuatha D Danann to have been a real people, thinks that
"the bones and armour of the great Dagda may still be found in his
honoured grave".[167] Other Celtic scholars might not be so sanguine,
though verses as old as the eleventh century assert that the Tuatha D
Danann used the brughs for burial. It was about this period that the
mythology of Ireland was being rewoven into spurious history. The poem,
which is called the "Chronicles of the Tombs", not only mentions the
"Monument of the Dagda" and the "Monument of the Morrg", but also
records the last resting-places of Ogma, Etain, Cairpr, Lugh, Boann,
and Angus.

We have for the present, however, to consider Angus in a far less
sepulchral light. He is, indeed, very much alive in the story to be
related. The "Son of the Young" was absent when the distribution of the
_sdhe_ was made. When he returned, he came to his father, the Dagda,
and demanded one. The Dagda pointed out to him that they had all been
given away. Angus protested, but what could be done? By fair means,
evidently nothing; but by craft, a great deal. The wily Angus appeared
to reconcile himself to fate, and only begged his father to allow him to
stay at the _sdh_ of Brugh-na-Boyne (New Grange) for a day and a night.
The Dagda agreed to this, no doubt congratulating himself on having got
out of the difficulty so easily. But when he came to Angus to remind him
that the time was up, Angus refused to go. He had been granted, he
claimed, day and night, and it is of days and nights that time and
eternity are composed; therefore there was no limit to his tenure of the
_sdh_. The logic does not seem very convincing to our modern minds, but
the Dagda is said to have been satisfied with it. He abandoned the best
of his two palaces to his son, who took peaceable possession of it. Thus
it got a second name, that of the _Sdh_ or _Brugh_ of the "Son of the
Young".[168]

The Dagda does not, after this, play much active part in the history of
the people of the goddess Danu. We next hear of a council of gods to
elect a fresh ruler. There were five candidates for the vacant
throne-Bodb the Red, Mider, Ilbhreach[169] son of Manannn, Lr, and
Angus himself, though the last-named, we are told, had little real
desire to rule, as he preferred a life of freedom to the dignities of
kingship. The Tuatha D Danann went into consultation, and the result of
their deliberation was that their choice fell upon Bodb the Red, for
three reasons-firstly, for his own sake; secondly, for his father, the
Dagda's sake; and thirdly, because he was the Dagda's eldest son. The
other competitors approved this choice, except two. Mider refused to
give hostages, as was the custom, to Bodb Derg, and fled with his
followers to "a desert country round Mount Leinster", in County Carlow,
while Lr retired in great anger to Sdh Fionnachaidh, declining to
recognize or obey the new king.

Why Lr and Mider should have so taken the matter to heart is difficult
to understand, unless it was because they were both among the oldest of
the gods. The indifference of Angus is easier to explain. He was the
Gaelic Eros, and was busy living up to his character. At this time, the
object of his love was a maiden who had visited him one night in a
dream, only to vanish when he put out his arms to embrace her. All the
next day, we are told, Angus took no food. Upon the following night, the
unsubstantial lady again appeared, and played and sang to him. That
following day, he also fasted. So things went on for a year, while Angus
pined and wasted for love. At last the physicians of the Tuatha D
Danann guessed his complaint, and told him how fatal it might be to him.
Angus asked that his mother Boann might be sent for, and, when she came,
he told her his trouble, and implored her help. She went to the Dagda
and begged him, if he did not wish to see his son die of unrequited
love, a disease that all Diancecht's medicine and Goibniu's magic could
not heal, to find the dream-maiden. The Dagda could do nothing himself,
but he sent to Bodb the Red, and the new king of the gods sent in turn
to the lesser deities of Ireland, ordering all of them to search for
her. For a year she could not be found, but at last the disconsolate
lover received a message, charging him to come and see if he could
recognize the lady of his dreams. Angus came, and knew her at once, even
though she was surrounded by thrice fifty attendant nymphs. Her name was
Caer, and she was the daughter of Etal Ambuel, who had a _sdh_ at
Uaman, in Connaught. Bodb the Red demanded her for Angus in marriage,
but her father declared that he had no control over her. She was a
swan-maiden, he said; and every year, as soon as summer was over, she
went with her companions to a lake called "Dragon-Mouth", and there all
of them became swans. But, refusing to be thus put off, Angus waited in
patience until the day of the magical change, and then went down to the
shore of the lake. There, surrounded by thrice fifty swans, he saw Caer,
herself a swan surpassing all the rest in beauty and whiteness. He
called to her, proclaiming his passion and his name, and she promised to
be his bride, if he too would become a swan. He agreed, and with a word
she changed him into swan-shape, and thus they flew side by side to
Angus's _sdh_, where they retook the human form, and, no doubt, lived
happily as long as could be expected of such changeable immortals as
pagan deities.[170]

Meanwhile, the people of the goddess Danu were justly incensed against
both Lr and Mider. Bodb the Red made a yearly war upon Mider in his
_sdh_, and many of the divine race were killed on either side. But
against Lr, the new king of the gods refused to move, for there had
been a great affection between them. Many times Bodb Derg tried to
regain Lr's friendship by presents and compliments, but for a long time
without success.

At last Lr's wife died, to the sea-god's great sorrow. When Bodb the
Red heard the news, he sent a messenger to Lr, offering him one of his
own foster-daughters, Aebh[171], Aeife[172], and Ailbhe[173], the
children of Ailioll of Arran. Lr, touched by this, came to visit Bodb
the Red at his _sdh_, and chose Aebh for his wife. "She is the eldest,
so she must be the noblest of them," he said. They were married, and a
great feast made; and Lr took her back with him to Sdh Fionnachaidh.

Aebh bore four children to Lr. The eldest was a daughter called Finola,
the second was a son called Aed; the two others were twin boys called
Fiachra and Conn, but in giving birth to those Aebh died.

Bodb the Red then offered Lr another of his foster-children, and he
chose the second, Aeife. Every year Lr and Aeife and the four children
used to go to Manannn's "Feast of Age", which was held at each of the
_sdhe_ in turn. The four children grew up to be great favourites among
the people of the goddess Danu.

But Aeife was childless, and she became jealous of Lr's children; for
she feared that he would love them more than he did her. She brooded
over this until she began, first to hope for, and then to plot their
deaths. She tried to persuade her servants to murder them, but they
would not. So she took the four children to Lake Darvra (now called
Lough Derravargh in West Meath), and sent them into the water to bathe.
Then she made an incantation over them, and touched them, each in turn,
with a druidical wand, and changed them into swans.

But, though she had magic enough to alter their shapes, she had not the
power to take away their human speech and minds. Finola turned, and
threatened her with the anger of Lr and of Bodb the Red when they came
to hear of it. She, however, hardened her heart, and refused to undo
what she had done. The children of Lr, finding their case a hopeless
one, asked her how long she intended to keep them in that condition.

"You would be easier in mind," she said, "if you had not asked the
question; but I will tell you. You shall be three hundred years here, on
Lake Darvra; and three hundred years upon the Sea of Moyle[174], which
is between Erin and Alba; and three hundred years more at Irros
Domnann[175] and the Isle of Glora in Erris[176]. Yet you shall have two
consolations in your troubles; you shall keep your human minds, and yet
suffer no grief at knowing that you have been changed into swans, and
you shall be able to sing the softest and sweetest songs that were ever
heard in the world."

Then Aeife went away and left them. She returned to Lr, and told him
that the children had fallen by accident into Lake Darvra, and were
drowned.

But Lr was not satisfied that she spoke the truth, and went in haste to
the lake, to see if he could find traces of them. He saw four swans
close to the shore, and heard them talking to one another with human
voices. As he approached, they came out of the water to meet him. They
told him what Aeife had done, and begged him to change them back into
their own shapes. But Lr's magic was not so powerful as his wife's, and
he could not.

Nor even could Bodb the Red-to whom Lr went for help,-for all that he
was king of the gods. What Aeife had done could not be undone. But she
could be punished for it! Bodb ordered his foster-daughter to appear
before him, and, when she came, he put an oath on her to tell him truly
"what shape of all others, on the earth, or above the earth, or beneath
the earth, she most abhorred, and into which she most dreaded to be
transformed". Aeife was obliged to answer that she most feared to become
a demon of the air. So Bodb the Red struck her with his wand, and she
fled from them, a shrieking demon.

All the Tuatha D Danann went to Lake Darvra to visit the four swans.
The Milesians heard of it, and also went; for it was not till long after
this that gods and mortals ceased to associate. The visit became a
yearly feast. But, at the end of three hundred years, the children of
Lr were compelled to leave Lake Darvra, and go to the Sea of Moyle, to
fulfil the second period of their exile.

They bade farewell to gods and men, and went. And, for fear lest they
might be hurt by anyone, the Milesians made it law in Ireland that no
man should harm a swan, from that time forth for ever.

The children of Lr suffered much from tempest and cold on the stormy
Sea of Moyle, and they were very lonely. Once only during that long
three hundred years did they see any of their friends. An embassy of the
Tuatha D Danann, led by two sons of Bodb the Red, came to look for
them, and told them all that had happened in Erin during their exile.

At last that long penance came to an end, and they went to Irros Domnann
and Innis Glora for their third stage. And while it was wearily dragging
through, Saint Patrick came to Ireland, and put an end to the power of
the gods for ever. They had been banned and banished when the children
of Lr found themselves free to return to their old home. Sdh
Fionnechaidh was empty and deserted, for Lr had been killed by Caoilt,
the cousin of Finn mac Coul.[177]

So, after long, vain searching for their lost relatives, they gave up
hope, and returned to the Isle of Glora. They had a friend there, the
Lonely Crane of Inniskea[178], which has lived upon that island ever
since the beginning of the world, and will be still sitting there on the
day of judgment. They saw no one else until, one day, a man came to the
island. He told them that he was Saint Caemhoc[179], and that he had
heard their story. He brought them to his church, and preached the new
faith to them, and they believed on Christ, and consented to be
baptised. This broke the pagan spell, and, as soon as the holy water was
sprinkled over them, they returned to human shape. But they were very
old and bowed-three aged men and an ancient woman. They did not live
long after this, and Saint Caemhoc, who had baptised them, buried them
all together in one grave.[180]

But, in telling this story, we have leaped nine hundred years-a great
space in the history even of gods. We must retrace our steps, if not
quite to the days of Eremon and Eber, sons of Mil, and first kings of
Ireland, at any rate to the beginning of the Christian era.

At this time Eochaid Airem was high king of Ireland, and reigned at
Tara; while, under him, as vassal monarchs, Conchobar mac Nessa ruled
over the Red Branch Champions of Ulster; Curoi son of Daire[181], was
king of Munster; Mesgegra was king of Leinster; and Ailell, with his
famous queen, Medb, governed Connaught.

Shortly before, among the gods, Angus Son of the Young, had stolen away
Etain, the wife of Mider. He kept her imprisoned in a bower of glass,
which he carried everywhere with him, never allowing her to leave it,
for fear Mider might recapture her. The Gaelic Pluto, however, found out
where she was, and was laying plans to rescue her, when a rival of
Etain's herself decoyed Angus away from before the pleasant
prison-house, and set his captive free. But, instead of returning her to
Mider, she changed the luckless goddess into a fly, and threw her into
the air, where she was tossed about in great wretchedness at the mercy
of every wind.

At the end of seven years, a gust blew her on to the roof of the house
of Etair, one of the vassals of Conchobar, who was celebrating a feast.
The unhappy fly, who was Etain, was blown down the chimney into the room
below, and fell, exhausted, into a golden cup full of beer, which the
wife of the master of the house was just going to drink. And the woman
drank Etain with the beer.

But, of course, this was not the end of her-for the gods cannot really
die,-but only the beginning of a new life. Etain was reborn as the
daughter of Etair's wife, no one knowing that she was not of mortal
lineage. She grew up to be the most beautiful woman in Ireland.

When she was twenty years old, her fame reached the high king, who sent
messengers to see if she was as fair as men reported. They saw her, and
returned to the king full of her praises. So Eochaid himself went to pay
her a visit. He chose her to be his queen, and gave her a splendid
dowry.

It was not till then that Mider heard of her. He came to her in the
shape of a young man, beautifully dressed, and told her who she really
was, and how she had been his wife among the people of the goddess Danu.
He begged her to leave the king, and come with him to his _sdh_ at Bri
Leith. But Etain refused with scorn.

"Do you think," she said, "that I would give up the high king of Ireland
for a person whose name and kindred I do not know, except from his own
lips?"

The god retired, baffled for the time. But one day, as King Eochaid sat
in his hall, a stranger entered. He was dressed in a purple tunic, his
hair was like gold, and his eyes shone like candles.

The king welcomed him.

"But who are you?" he asked; "for I do not know you."

"Yet I have known you a long time," returned the stranger.

"Then what is your name?"

"Not a very famous one. I am Mider of Bri Leith."

"Why have you come here?"

"To challenge you to a game of chess."

"I am a good chess-player," replied the king, who was reputed to be the
best in Ireland.

"I think I can beat you," answered Mider.

"But the chess-board is in the queen's room, and she is asleep,"
objected Eochaid.

"It does not matter," replied Mider. "I have brought a board with me
which can be in no way worse than yours."

He showed it to the king, who admitted that the boast was true. The
chess-board was made of silver set in precious stones, and the pieces
were of gold.

"Play!" said Mider to the king.

"I never play without a wager," replied Eochaid.

"What shall be the stake?" asked Mider.

"I do not care," replied Eochaid.

"Good!" returned Mider. "Let it be that the loser pays whatever the
winner demands."

"That is a wager fit for a king," said Eochaid.

They played, and Mider lost. The stake that Eochaid claimed from him was
that Mider and his subjects should make a road through Ireland. Eochaid
watched the road being made, and noticed how Mider's followers yoked
their oxen, not by the horns, as the Gaels did, but at the shoulders,
which was better. He adopted the practice, and thus got his nickname,
Airem, that is, "The Ploughman".

After a year, Mider returned and challenged the king again, the terms to
be the same as before. Eochaid agreed with joy; but, this time, he lost.

"I could have beaten you before, if I had wished," said Mider, "and now
the stake I demand is Etain, your queen."

The astonished king, who could not for shame go back upon his word,
asked for a year's delay. Mider agreed to return upon that day year to
claim Etain. Eochaid consulted with his warriors, and they decided to
keep watch through the whole of the day fixed by Mider, and let no one
pass in or out of the royal palace till sunset. For Eochaid held that if
the fairy king could not get Etain upon that one day, his promise would
be no longer binding on him.

So, when the day came, they barred the door and guarded it, but suddenly
they saw Mider among them in the hall. He stood beside Etain, and sang
this song to her, setting out the pleasures of the homes of the gods
under the enchanted hills.

       "O fair lady! will you come with me
        To a wonderful country which is mine,
        Where the people's hair is of golden hue,
        And their bodies the colour of virgin snow?

       "There no grief or care is known;
        White are their teeth, black their eyelashes;
        Delight of the eye is the rank of our hosts,
        With the hue of the fox-glove on every cheek.

       "Crimson are the flowers of every mead,
        Gracefully speckled as the blackbird's egg;
        Though beautiful to see be the plains of Inisfail[182]
        They are but commons compared to our great plains.

       "Though intoxicating to you be the ale-drink of Inisfail,
        More intoxicating the ales of the great country;
        The only land to praise is the land of which I speak,
        Where no one ever dies of decrepit age.

       "Soft sweet streams traverse the land;
        The choicest of mead and of wine;
        Beautiful people without any blemish;
        Love without sin, without wickedness.

       "We can see the people upon all sides,
        But by no one can we be seen;
        The cloud of Adam's transgression it is
        That prevents them from seeing us.

       "O lady, should you come to my brave land,
        It is golden hair that will be on your head;
        Fresh pork, beer, new milk, and ale,
        You there with me shall have, O fair lady!"[183]

Then Mider greeted Eochaid, and told him that he had come to take away
Etain, according to the king's wager. And, while the king and his
warriors looked on helplessly, he placed one arm round the now willing
woman, and they both vanished. This broke the spell that hung over
everyone in the hall; they rushed to the door, but all they could see
were two swans flying away.

The king would not, however, yield to the god. He sent to every part of
Ireland for news of Etain, but his messengers all came back without
having been able to find her. At last, a druid named Daln learned, by
means of ogams carved upon wands of yew, that she was hidden under
Mider's _sdh_ of Bri Leith. So Eochaid marched there with an army, and
began to dig deep into the abode of the gods of which the "fairy hill"
was the portal. Mider, as terrified as was the Greek god Hades when it
seemed likely that the earth would be rent open,[184] and his domains
laid bare to the sight, sent out fifty fairy maidens to Eochaid, every
one of them having the appearance of Etain. But the king would only be
content with the real Etain, so that Mider, to save his _sdh_, was at
last obliged to give her up. And she lived with the King of Ireland
after that until the death of both of them.

But Mider never forgave the insult. He bided his time for three
generations, until Eochaid and Etain had a male descendant. For they had
no son, but only a daughter called Etain, like her mother, and this
second Etain had a daughter called Messbuachallo, who had a son called
Conair, surnamed "the Great". Mider and the gods wove the web of fate
round Conair, so that he and all his men died violent deaths.[185]

-----

Footnote 152:

  De Jubainville: _Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_, p. 269.

Footnote 153:

  See chap. IV-"The Religion of the Ancient Britons and Druidism".

Footnote 154:

  Tennyson: _Idylls of the King: The Passing of Arthur_.

Footnote 155:

  See Wood-Martin: _Traces of the Elder Faiths of Ireland_, Vol I, pp.
  213-215.

Footnote 156:

  The following verses are taken from Dr. Kuno Meyer's translation of
  the romance entitled _The Voyage of Bran, Son of Febal_, published in
  Mr. Nutt's Grimm Library, Vol. IV.

Footnote 157:

  The Plain of Sports.

Footnote 158:

  The Happy Plain.

Footnote 159:

  Pronounced _Shee Finneha_.

Footnote 160:

  Pronounced _Shee Bove_.

Footnote 161:

  Pronounced _Shee Assaroe_.

Footnote 162:

  Pronounced _Finnvar_.

Footnote 163:

  Pronounced _Far-shee_.

Footnote 164:

  O'Curry: _Lectures on the MS. Materials of Ancient Irish History_,
  Appendix, p. 505.

Footnote 165:

  See Fergusson: _Rude Stone Monuments_, pp. 200-213.

Footnote 166:

  O'Curry: _MS. Materials_, p. 505.

Footnote 167:

  Fergusson: _Rude Stone Monuments_, p. 209.

Footnote 168:

  This story is contained in the Book of Leinster.

Footnote 169:

  Pronounced _Ilbrec_.

Footnote 170:

  This story, called the _Dream of Angus_, will be found translated into
  English by Dr. Edward Mller in Vol. III. of the _Revue Celtique_,
  from an eighteenth-century MS. in the British Museum.

Footnote 171:

  Pronounced _Aive_.

Footnote 172:

  Pronounced _Aiva_.

Footnote 173:

  Pronounced _Alva_.

Footnote 174:

  Now called "North Channel".

Footnote 175:

  The Peninsula of Erris, in Mayo.

Footnote 176:

  A small island off Benmullet.

Footnote 177:

  See chap. XIV-"Finn and the Fenians".

Footnote 178:

  An island off the coast of Mayo. Its lonely crane was one of the
  "Wonders of Ireland", and is still an object of folk-belief.

Footnote 179:

  Pronounced _Kemoc_.

Footnote 180:

  This famous story of the _Fate of the Children of Lr_ is not found in
  any MS. earlier than the beginning of the seventeenth century. A
  translation of it has been published by Eugene O'Curry in _Atlantis_,
  Vol. IV, from which the present abridgment is made.

Footnote 181:

  Pronounced _Dara_.

Footnote 182:

  A poetical name for Ireland.

Footnote 183:

  Translated by O'Curry, _Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish_,
  Lecture IX, p. 192, 193.

Footnote 184:

  _Iliad_, Book XX.

Footnote 185:

  The story of Mider's revenge and Conair's death is told in the
  romance _Bruidhen D Derga_, "The Destruction of Da Derga's Fort",
  translated by Dr. Whitley Stokes, Eugene O'Curry, and Professor Zimmer
  from the original text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XII

                            THE IRISH ILIAD


With Eber and Eremon, sons of Mil, and conquerors of the gods, begins a
fresh series of characters in Gaelic tradition-the early "Milesian"
kings of Ireland. Though monkish chroniclers have striven to find
history in the legends handed down concerning them, they are none the
less almost as mythical as the Tuatha D Danann. The first of them who
has the least appearance of reality is Tigernmas, who is recorded to
have reigned a hundred years after the coming of the Milesians. He seems
to have been what is sometimes called a "Culture-king", bearing much the
same kind of relation to Ireland as Theseus bore to Athens or Minos to
Crete. During his reign, nine new lakes and three new rivers broke forth
from beneath the earth to give their waters to Erin. Under his auspices,
gold was first smelted, ornaments of gold and silver were first made,
and clothes first dyed. He is said to have perished mysteriously[186]
with three-fourths of the men of Erin while worshipping Cromm Cruaich on
the field of Mag Slecht. In him Mr. Nutt sees, no doubt rightly, the
great mythical king who, in almost all national histories, closes the
strictly mythological age, and inaugurates a new era of less obviously
divine, if hardly less apocryphal characters.[187]

In spite, however, of the worship of the Tuatha D Danann instituted by
Eremon, we find the early kings and heroes of Ireland walking very
familiarly with their gods. Eochaid Airem, high king of Ireland, was
apparently reckoned a perfectly fit suitor for the goddess Etain, and
proved a far from unsuccessful rival of Mider, the Gaelic Pluto.[188]
And adventures of love or war were carried quite as cheerfully among the
_sdh_ dwellers by Eochaid's contemporaries-Conchobar son of Nessa, King
of Ulster, Curoi son of Daire, King of Munster, Mesgegra, King of
Leinster, and Ailell and Medb[189], King and Queen of Connaught.

All these figures of the second Gaelic cycle (that of the heroes of
Ulster, and especially of their great champion, Cuchulainn) lived,
according to Irish tradition, at about the beginning of the Christian
era. Conchobar, indeed, is said to have expired in a fit of rage on
hearing of the death of Christ.[190]

But this is a very transparent monkish interpolation into the original
story. A quite different view is taken by most modern scholars, who
would see gods and not men in all the legendary characters of the Celtic
heroic cycles. Upon such a subject, however, one may legitimately take
sides. Were King Conchobar and his Ultonian champions, Finn and his
Fenians, Arthur and his Knights once living men round whom the
attributes of gods have gathered, or were they ancient deities renamed
and stripped of some of their divinity to make them more akin to their
human worshippers? History or mythology? A mingling, perhaps, of both.
Cuchulainn[191] may have been the name of a real Gaelic warrior, however
suspiciously he may now resemble the sun-god, who is said to have been
his father. King Conchobar may have been the real chief of a tribe of
Irish Celts before he became an adumbration of the Gaelic sky-god. It is
the same problem that confronts us in dealing with the heroic legends of
Greece and Rome. Were Achilles, Agamemnon, Odysseus, Paris, neas gods,
demi-gods, or men? Let us call them all alike-whether they be Greek or
Trojan heroes, Red Branch Champions, or followers of the Gaelic Finn or
the British Arthur-demi-gods. Even so, they stand definitely apart from
the older gods who were greater than they were.

We are stretching no point in calling them demi-gods, for they were
god-descended.[192] Cuchulainn, the greatest hero of the Ulster cycle,
was doubly so; for on his mother's side he was the grandson of the
Dagda, while Lugh of the Long Hand is said to have been his father. His
mother, Dechtir, daughter of Maga, the daughter of Angus "Son of the
Young", was half-sister to King Conchobar, and all the other principal
heroes were of hardly less lofty descent. It is small wonder that they
are described in ancient manuscripts[193] as terrestrial gods and
goddesses.

"Terrestrial" they may have been in form, but their acts were
superhuman. Indeed, compared with the more modest exploits of the heroes
of the "Iliad", they were those of giants. Where Greek warriors slew
their tens, these Ultonians despatched their hundreds. They came home
after such exploits so heated that their cold baths boiled over. When
they sat down to meat, they devoured whole oxen, and drank their mead
from vats. With one stroke of their favourite swords they beheaded hills
for sport. The gods themselves hardly did more, and it is easy to
understand that in those old days not only might the sons of gods look
upon the daughters of men and find them fair, but immortal women also
need not be too proud to form passing alliances with mortal men.

Some of the older deities seem to have already passed out of memory at
the time of the compilation of the Ulster cycle. At any rate, they make
no appearance in it. Dead Nuada rests in the _grianan_ of Aileach; Ogma
lies low in _sdh_ Airceltrai; while the Dagda, thrust into the
background by his son Angus, mixes himself very little in the affairs of
Erin.[194] But the Morrg is no less eager in encouraging human or
semi-divine heroes to war than she was when she revived the fainting
spirits of the folk of the goddess Danu at the Battle of Moytura. The
gods who appear most often in the cycle of the Red Branch of Ulster are
the same that have lived on throughout with the most persistent
vitality. Lugh the Long-handed, Angus of the Brugh, Mider, Bodb the Red,
and Manannn son of Lr, are the principal deities that move in the
background of the stage where the chief parts are now played by mortals.
But, to make up for the loss of some of the greater divine figures, the
ranks of the gods are being recruited from below. All manner of inferior
divinities claim to be members of the tribe of the goddess Danu. The
goblins and sprites and demons of the air who shrieked around battles
are described collectively as Tuatha D Danann.[195]

As for the Fomors, they have lost their distinctive names, though they
are still recognized as dwellers beneath the deep, who at times raid
upon the coast, and do battle with the heroes over whom Conchobar ruled
at Emain Macha.

This seat of his government, the traditionary site of which is still
marked by an extensive prehistoric entrenchment called Navan Fort[196],
near Armagh, was the centre of an Ulster that stretched southwards as
far as the Boyne, and round its ruler gathered such a galaxy of warriors
as Ireland had never seen before, or will again. They called themselves
the "Champions of the Red Branch"; there was not one of them who was not
a hero; but they are all dwarfed by one splendid figure-Cuchulainn,
whose name means "Culann's Hound". Mr. Alfred Nutt calls him "the Irish
Achilles"[197], while Professor Rhys would rather see in him a Heracles
of the Gaels.[198] Like Achilles, he was the chosen hero of his people,
invincible in battle, and yet "at once to early death and sorrows doomed
beyond the lot of man", while, like Heracles, his life was a series of
wonderful exploits and labours. It matters little enough; for the lives
of all such mythical heroes must be of necessity somewhat alike.

If Achilles and Heracles were, as some think, personifications of the
sun, Cuchulainn is not less so. Most of his attributes, as the old
stories record them, are obviously solar symbols. He seemed generally
small and insignificant, yet, when he was at his full strength, no one
could look him in the face without blinking, while the heat of his
constitution melted snow for thirty feet all round him. He turned red
and hissed as he dipped his body into its bath-the sea. Terrible was his
transformation when sorely oppressed by his enemies, as the sun is by
mist, storm, or eclipse. At such times "among the arial clouds over his
head were visible the virulent pouring showers and sparks of ruddy fire
which the seething of his savage wrath caused to mount up above him. His
hair became tangled about his head, as it had been branches of a red
thorn-bush stuffed into a strongly-fenced gap.... Taller, thicker, more
rigid, longer than mast of a great ship was the perpendicular jet of
dusky blood which out of his scalp's very central point shot upwards and
then was scattered to the four cardinal points; whereby was formed a
magic mist of gloom resembling the smoky pall that drapes a regal
dwelling, what time a king at nightfall of a winter's day draws near to
it."[199]

So marvellous a being[200] was, of course, of marvellous birth. His
mother, Dechtir, was on the point of being married to an Ulster
chieftain called Sualtam, and was sitting at the wedding-feast, when a
may-fly flew into her cup of wine and was unwittingly swallowed by her.
That same afternoon she fell into a deep sleep, and in her dream the
sun-god Lugh appeared to her, and told her that it was he whom she had
swallowed, and bore within her. He ordered her and her fifty attendant
maidens to come with him at once, and he put upon them the shapes of
birds, so that they were not seen to go. Nothing was heard of them
again. But one day, months later, a flock of beautiful birds appeared
before Emain Macha, and drew out its warriors in their chariots to hunt
them.

They followed the birds till nightfall, when they found themselves at
the Brugh on the Boyne, where the great gods had their homes. As they
looked everywhere for shelter, they suddenly saw a splendid palace. A
tall and handsome man, richly dressed, came out and welcomed them and
led them in. Within the hall were a beautiful and noble-faced woman and
fifty maidens, and on the tables were the richest meats and wines, and
everything fit for the needs of warriors. So they rested there the
night, and, during the night, they heard the cry of a new-born child.
The next morning, the man told them who he was, and that the woman was
Conchobar's half-sister Dechtir, and he ordered them to take the child,
and bring it up among the warriors of Ulster. So they brought him back,
together with his mother and the maidens, and Dechtir married Sualtam,
and all the chiefs, champions, druids, poets, and lawgivers of Ulster
vied with one another in bringing up the mysterious infant.

At first they called him Setanta; and this is how he came to change his
name. While still a child, he was the strongest of the boys of Emain
Macha, and the champion in their sports. One day he was playing hurley
single-handed against all the others, and beating them, when Conchobar
the King rode by with his nobles on the way to a banquet given by
Culann, the chief smith of the Ultonians. Conchobar called to the boy,
inviting him to go with them, and he replied that, when the game was
finished, he would follow. As soon as the Ulster champions were in
Culann's hall, the smith asked the king's leave to unloose his terrible
watch-dog, which was as strong and fierce as a hundred hounds; and
Conchobar, forgetting that the boy was to follow them, gave his
permission. Immediately the hound saw Setanta coming, it rushed at him,
open-mouthed. But the boy flung his playing-ball into its mouth, and
then, seizing it by the hind-legs, dashed it against a rock till he had
killed it.

The smith Culann was very angry at the death of his dog; for there was
no other hound in the world like him for guarding a house and flocks. So
Setanta promised to find and train up another one, not less good, for
Culann, and, until it was trained, to guard the smith's house as though
he were a dog himself. This is why he was called Cuchulainn, that is,
"Culann's Hound"; and Cathbad the Druid prophesied that the time would
come when the name would be in every man's mouth.

Not long after this, Cuchulainn overheard Cathbad giving druidical
instruction, and one of his pupils asking him what that day would be
propitious for. Cathbad replied that, if any young man first took arms
on that day, his name would be greater than that of any other hero's,
but his life would be short. At once, the boy went to King Conchobar,
and demanded arms and a chariot. Conchobar asked him who had put such a
thought into his head; and he answered that it was Cathbad the Druid. So
Conchobar gave him arms and armour, and sent him out with a charioteer.
That evening, Cuchulainn brought back the heads of three champions who
had killed many of the warriors of Ulster. He was then only seven years
old.

The women of Ulster so loved Cuchulainn after this that the warriors
grew jealous, and insisted that a wife should be found for him. But
Cuchulainn was very hard to please. He would have only one, Emer[201],
the daughter of Forgall the Wily, the best maiden in Ireland for the six
gifts-the gift of beauty, the gift of voice, the gift of sweet speech,
the gift of needlework, the gift of wisdom, and the gift of chastity. So
he went to woo her, but she laughed at him for a boy. Then Cuchulainn
swore by the gods of his people that he would make his name known
wherever the deeds of heroes were spoken of, and Emer promised to marry
him if he could take her from her warlike kindred.

When Forgall, her father, came to know of this betrothal, he devised a
plan to put an end to it. He went to visit King Conchobar at Emain
Macha. There he pretended to have heard of Cuchulainn for the first
time, and he saw him do all his feats. He said, loud enough to be
overheard by all, that if so promising a youth dared to go to the Island
of Scathach the Amazon, in the east of Alba,[202] and learn all her
warrior-craft, no living man would be able to stand before him. It was
hard to reach Scathach's Isle, and still harder to return from it, and
Forgall felt certain that, if Cuchulainn went, he would get his death
there.

Of course, nothing would now satisfy Cuchulainn but going. His two
friends, Laegaire the Battle-winner and Conall the Victorious, said that
they would go with him. But, before they had gone far, they lost heart
and turned back. Cuchulainn went on alone, crossing the Plain of
Ill-Luck, where men's feet stuck fast, while sharp grasses sprang up and
cut them, and through the Perilous Glens, full of devouring wild beasts,
until he came to the Bridge of the Cliff, which rose on end, till it
stood straight up like a ship's mast, as soon as anyone put foot on it.
Three times Cuchulainn tried to cross it, and thrice he failed. Then
anger came into his heart, and a magic halo shone round his head, and he
did his famous feat of the "hero's salmon leap", and landed, in one
jump, on the middle of the bridge, and then slid down it as it rose up
on end.

Scathach was in the _dn_, with her two sons. Cuchulainn went to her,
and put his sword to her breast, and threatened to kill her if she would
not teach him all her own skill in arms. So he became her pupil, and she
taught him all her war-craft. In return, Cuchulainn helped her against a
rival queen of the Amazons, called Aoife[203]. He conquered Aoife, and
compelled her to make peace with Scathach.

Then he returned to Ireland, and went in a scythed chariot to Forgall's
palace. He leaped over its triple walls, and slew everyone who came near
him. Forgall met his death in trying to escape Cuchulainn's rage. He
found Emer, and placed her in his chariot, and drove away; and, every
time that Forgall's warriors came up to them, he turned, and slew a
hundred, and put the rest to flight. He reached Emain Macha in safety,
and he and Emer were married there.

And so great, after this, were the fame of Cuchulainn's prowess and
Emer's beauty that the men and women of Ulster yielded them
precedence-him among the warriors and her among the women-in every feast
and banquet at Emain Macha.

But all that Cuchulainn had done up to this time was as nothing to the
deeds he did in the great war which all the rest of Ireland, headed by
Ailill and Medb, King and Queen of Connaught, made upon Ulster, to get
the Brown Bull of Cualgne.[204] This Bull was one of two, of fairy
descent. They had originally been the swineherds of two of the gods,
Bodb, King of the Sdhe of Munster, and Ochall Ochne, King of the Sdhe
of Connaught. As swineherds they were in perpetual rivalry; then, the
better to carry on their quarrel, they changed themselves into two
ravens, and fought for a year; next they turned into water-monsters,
which tore one another for a year in the Suir and a year in the Shannon;
then they became human again and fought as champions; and ended by
changing into eels. One of these eels went into the River Cruind, in
Cualgne[205], in Ulster, where it was swallowed by a cow belonging to
Daire of Cualgne, and the other into the spring of Uaran Garad, in
Connaught, where it passed into the belly of a cow of Queen Medb's. Thus
were born those two famous beasts, the Brown Bull of Ulster and the
White-horned Bull of Connaught.

Now the White-horned was of such proud mind that he scorned to belong to
a woman, and he went out of Medb's herds into those of her husband
Ailill. So that when Ailill and Medb one day, in their idleness, counted
up their possessions, to set them off one against the other, although
they were equal in every other thing, in jewels and clothes and
household vessels, in sheep and horses and swine and cattle, Medb had no
one bull that was worthy to be set beside Ailill's White-horned.
Refusing to be less in anything than her husband, the proud queen sent
heralds, with gifts and compliments, to Daire, asking him to lend her
the Brown Bull for a year. Daire would have done so gladly had not one
of Medb's messengers been heard boasting in his cups that, if Daire had
not lent the Brown Bull of his own free-will, Medb would have taken it.
This was reported to Daire, who at once swore that she should never have
it. Medb's messenger returned; and the Queen of Connaught, furious at
his refusal, vowed that she would take it by force.

She assembled the armies of all the rest of Ireland to go against
Ulster, and made Fergus son of Roy, an Ulster champion who had
quarrelled with King Conchobar, its leader. They expected to have an
easy victory, for the warriors of Ulster were at that time lying under a
magic weakness which fell upon them for many days in each year, as the
result of a curse laid upon them, long before, by a goddess who had been
insulted by one of Conchobar's ancestors. Medb called up a prophetess of
her people to foretell victory. "How do you see our hosts?" asked the
queen of the seeress. "I see crimson on them; I see red," she replied.
"But the warriors of Ulster are lying in their sickness. Nay, how do you
see our men?" "I see them all crimson; I see them all red," she
repeated. And then she added to the astonished queen, who had expected a
quite different foretelling: "For I see a small man doing deeds of arms,
though there are many wounds on his smooth skin; the hero-light shines
round his head, and there is victory on his forehead; he is richly
clothed, and young and beautiful and modest, but he is a dragon in
battle. His appearance and his valour are those of Cuchulainn of
Muirthemne; who that Culann's hound' from Muirthemne may be, I do not
know; but I know this, that all our army will be reddened by him. He is
setting out for battle; he will hew down your hosts; the slaughter he
shall make will be long remembered; there will be many women crying over
the bodies mangled by the Hound of the Forge whom I see before me
now."[206] For Cuchulainn was, for some reason unknown to us, the only
man in Ulster who was not subject to the magic weakness, and therefore
it fell upon him to defend Ulster single-handed against the whole of
Medb's army.

In spite of the injury done him by King Conchobar, Fergus still kept a
love for his own country. He had not the heart to march upon the
Ultonians without first secretly sending a messenger to warn them. So
that, though all the other champions of the Red Branch were helpless,
Cuchulainn was watching the marches when the army came.

Now begins the story of the _aristeia_ of the Gaelic hero. It is, after
the manner of epics, the record of a series of single combats, in each
of which Cuchulainn slays his adversary. Man after man comes against
him, and not one goes back. In the intervals between these duels,
Cuchulainn harasses the army with his sling, slaying a hundred men a
day. He kills Medb's pet dog, bird, and squirrel, and creates such
terror that no one dares to stir out of the camp. Medb herself has a
narrow escape; for one of her serving-women, who puts on her mistress's
golden head-dress, is killed by a stone flung from Cuchulainn's sling.

The great queen determines to see with her own eyes this marvellous hero
who is holding all her warriors at bay. She sends an envoy, asking him
to come and parley with her. Cuchulainn agrees, and, at the meeting,
Medb is amazed at his boyish look. She finds it hard to believe that it
is this beardless stripling of seventeen who is killing her champions,
until the whole army seems as though it were melting away. She offers
him her own friendship and great honours and possessions in Connaught if
he will forsake Conchobar. He refuses; but she offers it again and
again. At last Cuchulainn indignantly declares that the next man who
comes with such a message will do so at his peril. One bargain, however,
he will make. He is willing to fight one of the men of Ireland every
day, and, while the duel lasts, the main army may march on; but, as soon
as Cuchulainn has killed his man, it must halt until the next day. Medb
agrees to this, thinking it better to lose one man a day than a hundred.

Medb makes the same offer to every famous warrior, to induce him to go
against Cuchulainn. The reward for the head of the champion will be the
hand of her daughter, Findabair[207]. In spite of this, not one of the
aspirants to the princess can stand before Cuchulainn. All perish; and
Findabair, when she finds out how she is being promised to a fresh
suitor every day, dies of shame. But, while Cuchulainn is engaged in
these combats, Medb sends men who scour Ulster for the brown bull, and
find him, and drive him, with fifty heifers, into her camp.

Meanwhile the s Sdhe, the fairy god-clan, are watching the
half-divine, half-mortal hero, amazed at his achievements. His exploits
kindle love in the fierce heart of the Morrg, the great war-goddess.
Cuchulainn is awakened from sleep by a terrible shout from the north. He
orders his driver, Laeg, to yoke the horses to his chariot, so that he
may find out who raised it. They go in the direction from which the
sound had come, and meet with a woman in a chariot drawn by a red horse.
She has red eyebrows, and a red dress, and a long, red cloak, and she
carries a great, gray spear. He asks her who she is, and she tells him
that she is a king's daughter, and that she has fallen in love with him
through hearing of his exploits. Cuchulainn says that he has other
things to think of than love. She replies that she has been giving him
her help in his battles, and will still do so; and Cuchulainn answers
that he does not need any woman's help. "Then," says she, "if you will
not have my love and help, you shall have my hatred and enmity. When you
are fighting with a warrior as good as yourself, I will come against you
in various shapes and hinder you, so that he shall have the advantage."
Cuchulainn draws his sword, but all he sees is a hoodie crow sitting on
a branch. He knows from this that the red woman in the chariot was the
great queen of the gods.

The next day, a warrior named Loch went to meet Cuchulainn. At first he
refused to fight one who was beardless; so Cuchulainn smeared his chin
with blackberry juice, until it looked as though he had a beard. While
Cuchulainn was fighting Loch, the Morrg came against him three
times-first as a heifer which tried to overthrow him, and next as an eel
which got beneath his feet as he stood in running water, and then as a
wolf which seized hold of his right arm. But Cuchulainn broke the
heifer's leg, and trampled upon the eel, and put out one of the wolf's
eyes, though, every one of these three times, Loch wounded him. In the
end, Cuchulainn slew Loch with his invincible spear, the _gae
bolg_[208], made of a sea-monster's bones. The Morrg came back to
Cuchulainn, disguised as an old woman, to have her wounds healed by him,
for no one could cure them but he who had made them. She became his
friend after this, and helped him.

But the fighting was so continuous that Cuchulainn got no sleep, except
just for a while, from time to time, when he might rest a little, with
his head on his hand and his hand on his spear and his spear on his
knee. So that his father, Lugh the Long-handed, took pity on him and
came to him in the semblance of a tall, handsome man in a green cloak
and a gold-embroidered silk shirt, and carrying a black shield and a
five-pronged spear. He put him into a sleep of three days and three
nights, and, while he rested, he laid druidical herbs on to all his
wounds, so that, in the end, he rose up again completely healed and as
strong as at the very beginning of the war. While he was asleep, the
boy-troop of Emain Macha, Cuchulainn's old companions, came and fought
instead of him, and slew three times their own number, but were all
killed.

It was at this time that Medb asked Fergus to go and fight with
Cuchulainn. Fergus answered that he would never fight against his own
foster-son. Medb asked him again and again, and at last he went, but
without his famous sword. "Fergus, my guardian," said Cuchulainn, "it is
not safe for you to come out against me without your sword." "If I had
the sword," replied Fergus, "I would not use it on you." Then Fergus
asked Cuchulainn, for the sake of all he had done for him in his
boy-hood, to pretend to fight with him, and then give way before him and
run away. Cuchulainn answered that he was very loth to be seen running
from any man. But Fergus promised Cuchulainn that, if Cuchulainn would
run away from Fergus then, Fergus would run away from Cuchulainn at some
future time, whenever Cuchulainn wished. Cuchulainn agreed to this, for
he knew that it would be for the profit of Ulster. So they fought a
little, and then Cuchulainn turned and fled in the sight of all Medb's
army. Fergus went back; and Medb could not reproach him any more.

But she cast about to find some other way of vanquishing Cuchulainn. The
agreement made had been that only one man a day should be sent against
him. But now Medb sent the wizard Calatin with his twenty-seven sons and
his grandson all at once, for she said "they are really only one, for
they are all from Calatin's body". They never missed a throw with their
poisoned spears, and every man they hit died, either on the spot or
within the week. When Fergus heard of this, he was in great grief, and
he sent a man called Fiacha, an exile, like himself, from Ulster, to
watch the fight and report how it went. Now Fiacha did not mean to join
in it, but when he saw Cuchulainn assailed by twenty-nine at a time, and
overpowered, he could not restrain himself. So he drew his sword and
helped Cuchulainn, and, between them, they killed Calatin and his whole
family.

As a last resource, now, Medb sent for Ferdiad, who was the great
champion of the Iberian "Men of Domnu", who had thrown in their lot with
Medb in the war for the Brown Bull. Ferdiad had been a companion and
fellow-pupil of Cuchulainn with Scathach, and he did not wish to fight
with him. But Medb told him that, if he refused, her satirists should
make such lampoons on him that he would die of shame, and his name would
be a reproach for ever. She also offered him great rewards and honours,
and bound herself in six sureties to keep her promises. At last,
reluctantly, he went.

Cuchulainn saw him coming, and went out to welcome him; but Ferdiad said
that he had not come as a friend, but to fight. Now Cuchulainn had been
Ferdiad's junior and serving-boy in Scathach's Island, and he begged him
by the memory of those old times to go back; but Ferdiad said he could
not. They fought all day, and neither had gained any advantage by
sunset. So they kissed one another, and each went back to his camp.
Ferdiad sent half his food and drink to Cuchulainn, and Cuchulainn sent
half his healing herbs and medicines to Ferdiad, and their horses were
put in the same stable, and their charioteers slept by the same fire.
And so it happened on the second day. But at the end of the third day
they parted gloomily, knowing that on the morrow one of them must fall;
and their horses were not put in the same stall that night, neither did
their charioteers sleep at the same fire. On the fourth day, Cuchulainn
succeeded in killing Ferdiad, by casting the _gae bolg_ at him from
underneath. But when he saw that he was dying, the battle-fury passed
away, and he took his old companion up in his arms, and carried him
across the river on whose banks they had fought, so that he might be
with the men of Ulster in his death, and not with the men of Ireland.
And he wept over him, and said: "It was all a game and a sport until
Ferdiad came; Oh, Ferdiad! your death will hang over me like a cloud for
ever. Yesterday he was greater than a mountain; to-day he is less than a
shadow."

By this time, Cuchulainn was so covered with wounds that he could not
bear his clothes to touch his skin, but had to hold them off with
hazel-sticks, and fill the spaces in between with grass. There was not a
place on him the size of a needle-point that had not a wound on it,
except his left hand, which held the shield.

But Sualtam, Cuchulainn's reputed father, had learned what a sore plight
his son was in. "Do I hear the heaven bursting, or the sea running away,
or the earth breaking open," he cried, "or is it my son's groaning that
I hear?" He came to look for him, and found him covered with wounds and
blood. But Cuchulainn would not let his father either weep for him or
try to avenge him. "Go, rather," he said to him, "to Emain Macha, and
tell Conchobar that I can no longer defend Ulster against all the four
provinces of Erin without help. Tell him that there is no part of my
body on which there is not a wound, and that, if he wishes to save his
kingdom, he must make no delay."

Sualtam mounted Cuchulainn's war-horse, the "Gray of Battle", and
galloped to Emain Macha. Three times he shouted: "Men are being killed,
women carried off, and cattle lifted in Ulster". Twice he met with no
response. The third time, Cathbad the Druid roused himself from his
lethargy to denounce the man who was disturbing the king's sleep. In his
indignation Sualtam turned away so sharply that the gray steed reared,
and struck its rider's shield against his neck with such force that he
was decapitated. The startled horse then turned back into Conchobar's
stronghold, and dashed through it, Sualtam's severed head continuing to
cry out: "Men are being killed, women carried off, and cattle lifted in
Ulster." Such a portent was enough to rouse the most drowsy. Conchobar,
himself again, swore a great oath. "The heavens are over us, the earth
is beneath us, and the sea circles us round, and, unless the heavens
fall, with all their stars, or the earth gives way beneath us, or the
sea bursts over the land, I will restore every cow to her stable, and
every woman to her home."

He sent messengers to rally Ulster, and they gathered, and marched on
the men of Erin. And then was fought such a battle as had never been
before in Ireland. First one side, then the other, gave way and rallied
again, until Cuchulainn heard the noise of the fight, and rose up, in
spite of all his wounds, and came to it.

He called out to Fergus, reminding him how he had bound himself with an
oath to run from him when called upon to do so. So Fergus ran before
Cuchulainn, and when Medb's army saw their leader running they broke and
fled like one man.

But the Brown Bull of Cualgne went with the army into Connaught, and
there he met Ailill's bull, the White-horned. And he fought the
White-horned, and tore him limb from limb, and carried off pieces of him
on his horns, dropping the loins at Athlone and the liver at Trim. Then
he went back to Cualgne, and turned mad, killing all who crossed his
path, until his heart burst with bellowing, and he fell dead.

This was the end of the great war called _Tin B Chuailgn_, the
"Driving of the Cattle of Cooley".

Yet, wondrous as it was, it was not the most marvellous of Cuchulainn's
exploits. Like all the solar gods and heroes of Celtic myth, he carried
his conquests into the dark region of Hades. On this occasion the
mysterious realm is an island called _Dn Scaith_, that is, the "Shadowy
Town", and though its king is not mentioned by name, it seems likely
that he was Mider, and that Dn Scaith is another name for the Isle of
Falga, or Man. The story, as a poem[209] relates it, is curiously
suggestive of a raid which the powers of light, and especially the
sun-gods, are represented as having made upon Hades in kindred British
myth.[210] The same loathsome combatants issue out of the underworld to
repel its assailants. There was a pit in the centre of Dn Scaith, out
of which swarmed a vast throng of serpents. No sooner had Cuchulainn and
the heroes of Ulster disposed of these than "a house full of toads" was
loosed upon them-"sharp, beaked monsters" (says the poem), which caught
them by the noses, and these were in turn replaced by fierce dragons.
Yet the heroes prevailed and carried off the spoil-three cows of magic
qualities and a marvellous cauldron in which was always found an
inexhaustible supply of meat, with treasure of silver and gold to boot.
They started back for Ireland in a coracle, the three cows being towed
behind, with the treasure in bags around their necks. But the gods of
Hades raised a storm which wrecked their ship, and they had to swim
home. Here Cuchulainn's more than mortal prowess came in useful. We are
told that he floated nine men to shore on each of his hands, and thirty
on his head, while eight more, clinging to his sides, used him as a kind
of life-belt.

After this, came the tragedy of Cuchulainn's career, the unhappy duel in
which he killed his only son, not knowing who he was. The story is one
common, apparently, to the Aryan nations, for it is found not only in
the Gaelic, but in the Teutonic and Persian mythic traditions. It will
be remembered that Cuchulainn defeated a rival of Scathach the Amazon,
named Aoife, and compelled her to render submission. The hero had also a
son by Aoife, and he asked that the boy should be called Conlaoch[211],
and that, when he was of age to travel, he should be sent to Ireland to
find his father. Aoife promised this, but, a little later, news came to
her that Cuchulainn had married Emer. Mad with jealousy, she determined
to make the son avenge her slight upon the father. She taught him the
craft of arms until there was no more that he could learn, and sent him
to Ireland. Before he started, she laid three _geasa_[212] upon him. The
first was that he was not to turn back, the second that he was never to
refuse a challenge, and the third that he was never to tell his name.

He arrived at Dundealgan[213], Cuchulainn's home, and the warrior Conall
came down to meet him, and asked him his name and lineage. He refused to
tell them, and this led to a duel, in which Conall was disarmed and
humiliated. Cuchulainn next approached him, asked the same question, and
received the same answer. "Yet if I was not under a command," said
Conlaoch, who did not know he was speaking to his father, "there is no
man in the world to whom I would sooner tell it than to yourself, for I
love your face." Even this compliment could not stave off the fight, for
Cuchulainn felt it his duty to punish the insolence of this stripling
who refused to declare who he was. The fight was a fierce one, and the
invincible Cuchulainn found himself so pressed that the "hero-light"
shone round him and transfigured his face. When Conlaoch saw this, he
knew who his antagonist must be, and purposely flung his spear slantways
that it might not hit his father. But before Cuchulainn understood, he
had thrown the terrible _gae bolg_. Conlaoch, dying, declared his name;
and so passionate was Cuchulainn's grief that the men of Ulster were
afraid that in his madness he might wreak his wrath upon them. They,
therefore, called upon Cathbad the Druid to put him under a glamour.
Cathbad turned the waves of the sea into the appearance of armed men,
and Cuchulainn smote them with his sword until he fell prone from
weariness.

It would take too long to relate all the other adventures and exploits
of Cuchulainn. Enough has been done if any reader of this chapter should
be persuaded by it to study the wonderful saga of ancient Ireland for
himself. We must pass on quickly to its tragical close-the hero's death.

Medb, Queen of Connaught, had never forgiven him for keeping back her
army from raiding Ulster, and for slaying so many of her friends and
allies. So she went secretly to all those whose relations Cuchulainn had
killed (and they were many), and stirred them up to revenge.

Besides this, she had sent the three daughters of Calatin the Wizard,
born after their father's death at the hands of Cuchulainn, to Alba and
to Babylon to learn witchcraft. When they came back they were mistresses
of every kind of sorcery, and could make the illusion of battle with an
incantation.

And, lest she might fail even then, she waited with patience until the
Ultonians were again in their magic weakness, and there was no one to
help Cuchulainn but himself.

Lugaid[214], son of the Curoi, King of Munster whom Cuchulainn had
killed for the sake of Blathnat, Mider's daughter, gathered the Munster
men; Erc, whose father had also fallen at Cuchulainn's hands, called the
men of Meath; the King of Leinster brought out his army; and, with
Ailill and Medb and all Connaught, they marched into Ulster again, and
began to ravage it.

Conchobar called his warriors and druids into council, to see if they
could find some means of putting off war until they were ready to meet
it. He did not wish Cuchulainn to go out single-handed a second time
against all the rest of Ireland, for he knew that, if the champion
perished, the prosperity of Ulster would fall with him for ever. So,
when Cuchulainn came to Emain Macha, the king set all the ladies,
singers, and poets of the court to keep his thoughts from war until the
men of Ulster had recovered from their weakness.

But while they sat feasting and talking in the "sunny house", the three
daughters of Calatin came fluttering down on to the lawn before it, and
began gathering grass and thistles and puff-balls and withered leaves,
and turning them into the semblance of armies. And, by the same magic,
they caused shouts and shrieks and trumpet-blasts and the clattering of
arms to be heard all round the house, as though a battle were being
fought.

Cuchulainn leaped up, red with shame to think that fighting should be
going on without his help, and seized his sword. But Cathbad's son
caught him by the arms. All the druids explained to him that what he saw
was only an enchantment raised by the children of Calatin to draw him
out to his death. But it was as much as all of them could do to keep him
quiet while he saw the phantom armies and heard the magic sounds.

So they decided that it would be well to remove Cuchulainn from Emain
Macha to _Glean-na-Bodhar_[215], the "Deaf Valley", until all the
enchantments of the daughters of Calatin were spent. It was the quality
of this valley that, if all the men of Ireland were to shout round it at
once, no one within it would hear a sound.

But the daughters of Calatin went there too, and again they took
thistles and puff-balls and withered leaves, and put on them the
appearance of armed men; so that there seemed to be no place outside the
whole valley that was not filled with shouting battalions. And they made
the illusion of fires all around and the sound of women shrieking.
Everyone who heard that outcry was frightened at it, not only the men
and women, but even the dogs.

Though the women and the druids shouted back with all the strength of
their voices, to drown it, they could not keep Cuchulainn from hearing.
"Alas!" he cried, "I hear the men of Ireland shouting as they ravage the
province. My triumph is at an end; my fame is gone; Ulster lies low for
ever." "Let it pass," said Cathbad; "it is only the idle magic noises
made by the children of Calatin, who want to draw you out, to put an end
to you. Stay here with us, and take no heed of them."

Cuchulainn obeyed; and the daughters of Calatin went on for a long time
filling the air with noises of battle. But they grew tired of it at
last; for they saw that the druids and women had outwitted them.

They did not succeed until one of them took the form of a leman of
Cuchulainn's, and came to him, crying out that Dundealgan was burnt, and
Muirthemne ruined, and the whole province of Ulster ravaged. Then, at
last, he was deceived, and took his arms and armour, and, in spite of
all that was said to him, he ordered Laeg to yoke his chariot.

Signs and portents now began to gather as thickly round the doomed hero
as they did round the wooers in the hall of Odysseus. His famous
war-horse, the Gray of Macha, refused to be bridled, and shed large
tears of blood. His mother, Dechtir, brought him a goblet full of wine,
and thrice the wine turned into blood as he put it to his lips. At the
first ford he crossed, he saw a maiden of the _sdhe_ washing clothes
and armour, and she told him that it was the clothes and arms of
Cuchulainn, who was soon to be dead. He met three ancient hags cooking a
hound on spits of rowan, and they invited him to partake of it. He
refused, for it was taboo to him to eat the flesh of his namesake; but
they shamed him into doing so by telling him that he ate at rich men's
tables and refused the hospitality of the poor. The forbidden meat
paralysed half his body. Then he saw his enemies coming up against him
in their chariots.

Cuchulainn had three spears, of which it was prophesied that each should
kill a king. Three druids were charged in turn to ask for these spears;
for it was not thought lucky to refuse anything to a druid. The first
one came up to where Cuchulainn was making the plain red with slaughter.
"Give me one of those spears," he said, "or I will lampoon you." "Take
it," replied Cuchulainn, "I have never yet been lampooned for refusing
anyone a gift." And he threw the spear at the druid, and killed him. But
Lugaid, son of Curoi, got the spear, and killed Laeg with it. Laeg was
the king of all chariot-drivers.

"Give me one of your spears, Cuchulainn," said the second druid. "I need
it myself," he replied. "I will lampoon the province of Ulster because
of you, if you refuse." "I am not obliged to give more than one gift in
a day," said Cuchulainn, "but Ulster shall never be lampooned because of
me." He threw the spear at the druid, and it went through his head. But
Erc, King of Leinster, got it, and mortally wounded the Gray of Macha,
the king of all horses.

"Give me your spear," said the third druid. "I have paid all that is due
from myself and Ulster," replied Cuchulainn. "I will satirize your
kindred if you do not," said the druid. "I shall never go home, but I
will be the cause of no lampoons there," answered Cuchulainn, and he
threw the spear at the asker, and killed him. But Lugaid threw it back,
and it went through Cuchulainn's body, and wounded him to the death.

Then, in his agony, he greatly desired to drink. He asked his enemies to
let him go to a lake that lay close by, and quench his thirst, and then
come back again. "If I cannot come back to you, come to fetch me," he
said; and they let him go.

Cuchulainn drank, and bathed, and came out of the water. But he found
that he could not walk; so he called to his enemies to come to him.
There was a pillar-stone near; and he bound himself to it with his belt,
so that he might die standing up, and not lying down. His dying horse,
the Gray of Macha, came back to fight for him, and killed fifty men with
his teeth and thirty with each of his hoofs. But the "hero-light" had
died out of Cuchulainn's face, leaving it as pale as "a one-night's
snow", and a crow came and perched upon his shoulder.

"Truly it was not upon that pillar that birds used to sit," said Erc.

Now that they were certain that Cuchulainn was dead, they all gathered
round him, and Lugaid cut off his head to take it to Medb. But vengeance
came quickly, for Conall the Victorious was in pursuit, and he made a
terrible slaughter of Cuchulainn's enemies.

Thus perished the great hero of the Gaels in the twenty-seventh year of
his age. And with him fell the prosperity of Emain Macha and of the Red
Branch of Ulster.

-----

Footnote 186:

    "There came
     Tigernmas, the prince of Tara yonder,
     On Hallowe'en with many hosts,
     A cause of grief to them was the deed.

    "Dead were the men
     Of Banba's host, without happy strength,
     Around Tigernmas, the destructive man in the North,
     From the worship of Cromm Cruaich-'twas no luck for them.

    "For I have learnt,
     Except one-fourth of the keen Gaels
     Not a man alive-lasting the snare!
     Escaped without death in his mouth."

     -Dr. Kuno Meyer's translation of the _Dinnsenchus of Mag Slecht_.

Footnote 187:

  Nutt: _Voyage of Bran_, p. 164.

Footnote 188:

  See chap. XI-"The Gods in Exile".

Footnote 189:

  Pronounced _Maive_.

Footnote 190:

  The story of the _Tragical Death of King Conchobar_, translated by
  Eugene O'Curry from the Book of Leinster, will be found in the
  appendix to his _MS. Materials of Irish History_, and (more
  accessible) in Miss Hull's _Cuchullin Saga_.

Footnote 191:

  The name is best pronounced _Choolin_ or _Cuchullin_ (_ch_ as in
  German).

Footnote 192:

  The descent of the principal Red Branch Heroes from the Tuatha D
  Danann is given in a table in Miss Hull's Introduction to her
  _Cuchullin Saga_.

Footnote 193:

  Conchobar is called a terrestrial god of the Ultonians in the Book of
  the Dun Cow, and Dechtir is termed a goddess in the Book of Leinster.

Footnote 194:

  He is last heard of as chief cook to Conair the Great, a mythical
  king of Ireland.

Footnote 195:

  In the Book of Leinster.

Footnote 196:

  For a description of Navan Fort see a paper by M. de Jubainville in
  the _Revue Celtique_, Vol. XVI.

Footnote 197:

  _Cuchulainn, the Irish Achilles._ By Alfred Nutt. Popular Studies in
  Mythology, Romance, and Folklore, No. 8.

Footnote 198:

  See a series of interesting parallels between Cuchulainn and Heracles
  in _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_, chap. IX and X.

Footnote 199:

  The _Tin B Chuailgn_. Translated by Standish Hayes O'Grady.

Footnote 200:

  The Irish romances relating to Cuchulainn and his cycle, nearly a
  hundred in number, need hardly be referred to severally in this
  chapter. Of many of the tales, too, there exist several
  slightly-varying versions. Many of them have been translated by
  different scholars. The reader desiring a more complete survey of the
  Cuchulainn legend is referred to Miss Hull's _Cuchullin Saga_ or to
  Lady Gregory's _Cuchulain of Muirthemne_.

Footnote 201:

  Pronounced _Avair_.

Footnote 202:

  Usually identified, however, with the Isle of Skye.

Footnote 203:

  Pronounced _Eefa_.

Footnote 204:

  A literal translation by Miss Winifred Faraday of the _Tin Bo
  Chuailgn_ from the Book of the Dun Cow and the Yellow Book of Lecan
  has been published by Mr. Nutt-Grimm Library, No. 16.

Footnote 205:

  Pronounced _Cooley_.

Footnote 206:

  This prophecy (here much abridged) is, in the original, in verse.

Footnote 207:

  Finnavr.

Footnote 208:

  "Bellows-dart", apparently a kind of harpoon. It had thirty barbs.

Footnote 209:

  It is contained in the Book of the Dun Cow story called the "Phantom
  Chariot".

Footnote 210:

  See chap. XX-"The Victories of Light over Darkness".

Footnote 211:

  Pronounced _Conla_.

Footnote 212:

  A kind of mystic prohibition or taboo; singular, _geis_.

Footnote 213:

  Now called Dundalk.

Footnote 214:

  Pronounced _Lewy_.

Footnote 215:

  Pronounced _Glen na Mower_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XIII

                        SOME GAELIC LOVE-STORIES


The heroic age of Ireland was not, however, the mere orgy of battle
which one might assume from the previous chapter. It had room for its
Helen and its Andromache as well as for its Achilles and its Hector. Its
champions could find time to make love as well as war. More than this,
the legends of their courtships often have a romantic beauty found in no
other early literature. The women have free scope of choice, and claim
the respect of their wooers. Indeed, it has been pointed out that the
mythical stories of the Celts must have created the chivalrous romances
of medival Europe. In them, and in no other previous literature, do we
find such knightly treatment of an enemy as we see in the story of
Cuchulainn and Ferdiad, or such poetic delicacy towards a woman as is
displayed in the wooing of Emer.[216] The talk between man and maid when
Cuchulainn comes in his chariot to pay his suit to Emer at Forgall's
_dn_ might, save for its strangeness, almost have come out of some
quite modern romance.

"Emer lifted up her lovely face and recognised Cuchulainn, and she said,
May God make smooth the path before you!'

"And you,' he said, may you be safe from every harm.'"

She asks him whence he has come, and he tells her. Then he questions her
about herself.

"I am a Tara of women," she replies, "the whitest of maidens, one who is
gazed at but who gazes not back, a rush too far to be reached, an
untrodden way.... I was brought up in ancient virtues, in lawful
behaviour, in the keeping of chastity, in rank equal to a queen, in
stateliness of form, so that to me is attributed every noble grace among
the hosts of Erin's women." In more boastful strain Cuchulainn tells of
his own birth and deeds. Not like the son of a peasant had he been
reared at Conchobar's court, but among heroes and champions, jesters and
druids. When he is weakest his strength is that of twenty; alone he will
fight against forty; a hundred men would feel safe under his protection.
One can imagine Emer's smile as she listens to these braggings. "Truly,"
she says, "they are goodly feats for a tender boy, but they are not yet
those of chariot-chiefs." Very modern, too, is the way in which she
coyly reminds her wooer that she has an elder sister as yet unwed. But,
when at last he drives her to the point, she answers him with gentle,
but proud decision. Not by words, but by deeds is she to be won. The man
she will marry must have his name mentioned wherever the exploits of
heroes are spoken of.

"Even as thou hast commanded, so shall all by me be done," said
Cuchulainn.

"And by me your offer is accepted, it is taken, it is granted," replied
Emer.

It seems a pity that, after so fine a wooing, Cuchulainn could not have
kept faithful to the bride he won. Yet such is not the way of heroes
whom goddesses as well as mortal women conspire to tempt from their
loyalty. Fand, the wife of Manannn son of Lr, deserted by the sea-god,
sent her sister Liban to Cuchulainn as an ambassador of love. At first
he refused to visit her, but ordered Laeg, his charioteer, to go with
Liban to the "Happy Plain" to spy out the land. Laeg returned
enraptured. "If all Ireland were mine," he assured his master, "with
supreme rule over its fair inhabitants, I would give it up without
regret to go and live in the place that I have seen."

So Cuchulainn himself went and stayed a month in the Celtic Paradise
with Fand, the fairest woman of the Sdhe. Returning to the land of
mortals, he made a tryst with the goddess to meet him again in his own
country by the yew-tree at the head of Baile's strand.

But Emer came to hear of it, and went to the meeting-place herself, with
fifty of her maidens, each armed with a knife to kill her rival. There
she found Cuchulainn, Laeg, and Fand.

"What has led you, Cuchulainn," said Emer, "to shame me before the women
of Erin and all honourable people? I came under your shelter, trusting
in your faithfulness, and now you seek a cause of quarrel with me."

But Cuchulainn, hero-like, could not understand why his wife should not
be content to take her turn with this other woman-surely no unworthy
rival, for she was beautiful, and came of the lofty race of gods. We see
Emer yield at last, with queenly pathos.

"I will not refuse this woman to you, if you long for her," she said,
"for I know that everything that is new seems fair, and everything that
is common seems bitter, and everything we have not seems desirable to
us, and everything we have we think little of. And yet, Cuchulainn, I
was once pleasing to you, and I would wish to be so again."

Her grief touched him. "By my word," he said, "you are pleasing to me,
and will be as long as I live."

"Then let me be given up," said Fand. "It is better that I should be,"
replied Emer. "No," said Fand; "it is I who must be given up in the end.

"It is I who will go, though I go with great sorrow. I would rather stay
with Cuchulainn than live in the sunny home of the gods.

"O Emer, he is yours, and you are worthy of him! What my hand cannot
have, my heart may yet wish well to.

"A sorrowful thing it is to love without return. Better to renounce than
not to receive a love equal to one's own.

"It was not well of you, O fair-haired Emer, to come to kill Fand in her
misery."

It was while the goddess and the human woman were contending with one
another in self-sacrifice that Manannn, Son of the Sea, heard of Fand's
trouble, and was sorry that he had forsaken her. So he came, invisible
to all but her alone. He asked her pardon, and she herself could not
forget that she had once been happy with the "horseman of the crested
waves", and still might be happy with him again. The god asked her to
make her choice between them, and, when she went to him, he shook his
mantle between her and Cuchulainn. It was one of the magic properties of
Manannn's mantle that those between whom it was shaken could never meet
again. Then Fand returned with her divine husband to the country of the
immortals; and the druids of Emain Macha gave Cuchulainn and Emer each a
drink of oblivion, so that Cuchulainn forgot his love and Emer her
jealousy.[217]

The scene of this story takes its name from another, and hardly less
beautiful love-tale. The "yew-tree at the head of Baile's strand" had
grown out of the grave of Baile of the Honeyed Speech, and it bore the
appearance of Baile's love, Ailinn. This Gaelic Romeo and Juliet were of
royal birth: Baile was heir to Ulster, and Ailinn was daughter of the
King of Leinster's son. Not by any feud of Montague and Capulet were
they parted, however, but by the craft of a ghostly enemy. They had
appointed to meet one another at Dundealgan, and Baile, who arrived
there first, was greeted by a stranger. "What news do you bring?" asked
Baile. "None," replied the stranger, "except that Ailinn of Leinster was
setting out to meet her lover, but the men of Leinster kept her back,
and her heart broke then and there from grief." When Baile heard this,
his own heart broke, and he fell dead on the strand, while the messenger
went on the wings of the wind to the home of Ailinn, who had not yet
started. "Whence come you?" she asked him. "From Ulster, by the shore of
Dundealgan, where I saw men raising a stone over one who had just died,
and on the stone I read the name of Baile. He had come to meet some
woman he was in love with, but it was destined that they should never
see one another again in life." At this news Ailinn, too, fell dead, and
was buried; and we are told that an apple-tree grew out of her grave,
the apples of which bore the likeness of the face of Baile, while a
yew-tree sprung from Baile's grave, and took the appearance of Ailinn.
This legend, which is probably a part of the common heritage of the
Aryans, is found in folk-lore over an area which stretches from Ireland
to India. The Gaelic version has, however, an ending unknown to the
others. The two trees, it relates, were cut down, and made into wands
upon which the poets of Ulster and of Leinster cut the songs of the
love-tragedies of their two provinces, in _ogam_. But even these mute
memorials of Baile and Ailinn were destined not to be divided. After two
hundred years, Art the "Lonely", High-King of Ireland, ordered them to
be brought to the hall of Tara, and, as soon as the wands found
themselves under the same roof, they all sprang together, and no force
or skill could part them again. So the king commanded them to be "kept,
like any other jewel, in the treasury of Tara."[218]

Neither of these stories, however, has as yet attained the fame of one
now to be retold.[219] To many, no doubt, Gaelic romance is summed up in
the one word Deirdre. It is the legend of this Gaelic Helen that the
poets of the modern Celtic school most love to elaborate, while old men
still tell it round the peat-fires of Ireland and the Highlands. Scholar
and peasant alike combine to preserve a tradition no one knows how many
hundred years old, for it was written down in the twelfth-century Book
of Leinster as one of the "prime stories" which every bard was bound to
be able to recite. It takes rank with the "Fate of the Sons of Tuirenn",
and with the "Fate of the Children of Lr", as one of the "Three
Sorrowful Stories of Erin".

So favourite a tale has naturally been much altered and added to in its
passage down the generations. But its essential story is as follows:-

King Conchobar of Ulster was holding festival in the house of one of his
bards, called Fedlimid, when Fedlimid's wife gave birth to a daughter,
concerning whom Cathbad the Druid uttered a prophecy. He foretold that
the new-born child would grow up to be the most lovely woman the world
had ever seen, but that her beauty would bring death to many heroes, and
much peril and sorrow to Ulster. On hearing this, the Red Branch
warriors demanded that she should be killed, but Conchobar refused, and
gave the infant to a trusted serving-woman, to be hidden in a secret
place in the solitude of the mountains, until she was of an age to be
his own wife.

So Deirdre (as Cathbad named her) was taken away to a hut so remote from
the paths of men that none knew of it save Conchobar. Here she was
brought up by a nurse, a fosterer, and a teacher, and saw no other
living creatures save the beasts and birds of the hills. Nevertheless,
woman-like, she aspired to be loved.

One day, her fosterer was killing a calf for their food, and its blood
ran out upon the snowy ground, which brought a black raven swooping to
the spot. "If there were a man," said Deirdre, "who had hair of the
blackness of that raven, skin of the whiteness of the snow, and cheeks
as red as the calf's blood, that is the man whom I would wish to marry
me."

"Indeed there is such a man," replied her teacher thoughtlessly.
"Naoise[220], one of the sons of Usnach[221], heroes of the same race as
Conchobar the King."

The curious Deirdre prevailed upon her teacher to bring Naoise to speak
with her. When they met she made good use of her time, for she offered
Naoise her love, and begged him to take her away from King Conchobar.

Naoise, bewitched by her beauty, consented. Accompanied by his two
brothers, Ardan and Ainle, and their followers, he fled with Deirdre to
Alba, where they made alliance with one of its kings, and wandered over
the land, living by following the deer, and by helping the king in his
battles.

The revengeful Conchobar bided his time. One day, as the heroes of the
Red Branch feasted together at Emain Macha, he asked them if they had
ever heard of a nobler company than their own. They replied that the
world could not hold such another. "Yet", said the king, "we lack our
full tale. The three sons of Usnach could defend the province of Ulster
against any other province of Ireland by themselves, and it is a pity
that they should still be exiles, for the sake of any woman in the
world. Gladly would I welcome them back!"

"We ourselves," replied the Ultonians, "would have counselled this long
ago had we dared, O King!"

"Then I will send one of my three best champions to fetch them," said
Conchobar. "Either Conall the Victorious, or Cuchulainn, the son of
Sualtam, or Fergus, the son of Roy; and I will find out which of those
three loves me best."

First he called Conall to him secretly.

"What would you do, O Conall," he asked, "if you were sent to fetch the
sons of Usnach, and they were killed here, in spite of your
safe-conduct?"

"There is not a man in Ulster," answered Conall, "who had hand in it
that would escape his own death from me."

"I see that I am not dearest of all men to you," replied Conchobar, and,
dismissing Conall, he called Cuchulainn, and put the same question to
him.

"By my sworn word," replied Cuchulainn, "if such a thing happened with
your consent, no bribe or blood-fine would I accept in lieu of your own
head, O Conchobar."

"Truly," said the king, "it is not you I will send."

The king then asked Fergus, and he replied that, if the sons of Usnach
were slain while under his protection, he would revenge the deed upon
anyone who was party to it, save only the king himself.

"Then it is you who shall go," said Conchobar. "Set forth to-morrow, and
rest not by the way, and when you put foot again in Ireland at the _Dn_
of Borrach, whatever may happen to you yourself, send the sons of Usnach
forward without delay."

The next morning, Fergus, with his two sons, Illann the Fair and Buinne
the Ruthless Red, set out for Alba in their galley, and reached Loch
Etive, by whose shores the sons of Usnach were then living. Naoise,
Ainle, and Ardan were sitting at chess when they heard Fergus's shout.

"That is the cry of a man of Erin," said Naoise.

"Nay," replied Deirdre, who had forebodings of trouble. "Do not heed it;
it is only the shout of a man of Alba." But the sons of Usnach knew
better, and sent Ardan down to the sea-shore, where he found Fergus and
his sons, and gave them greeting, and heard their message, and brought
them back with him.

That night Fergus persuaded the sons of Usnach to return with him to
Emain Macha. Deirdre, with her "second sight", implored them to remain
in Alba. But the exiles were weary for the sight of their own country,
and did not share their companion's fears. As they put out to sea,
Deirdre uttered her beautiful "Farewell to Alba", that land she was
never to behold again.

           "A lovable land is yon eastern land,
            Alba, with its marvels.
            I would not have come hither out of it,
            Had I not come with Naoise.

           "Lovable are Dn-fidga and Dn-finn,
            Lovable the fortress over them;
            Dear to the heart Inis Draigende,
            And very dear is Dn Suibni.

           "Caill Cuan!
            Unto which Ainle would wend, alas!
            Short the time seemed to me,
            With Naoise in the region of Alba.

           "Glenn Lid!
            Often I slept there under the cliff;
            Fish and venison and the fat of the badger
            Was my portion in Glenn Lid.

           "Glenn Masin!
            Its garlic was tall, its branches white;
            We slept a rocking sleep,
            Over the grassy estuary of Masin.

           "Glenn Etive!
            Where my first house I raised;
            Beauteous its wood:-upon rising
            A cattle-fold for the sun was Glenn Etive.

               *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

           "Glenn D-Rad!
            My love to every man who hath it as an heritage!
            Sweet the cuckoos' note on bending bough,
            On the peak over Glenn D-Rad.

           "Beloved is Draigen,
            Dear the white sand beneath its waves;
            I would not have come from it, from the East,
            Had I not come with my beloved."

They crossed the sea, and arrived at the _Dn_ of Borrach, who bade them
welcome to Ireland. Now King Conchobar had sent Borrach a secret
command, that he should offer a feast to Fergus on his landing. Strange
taboos called _geasa_ are laid upon the various heroes of ancient
Ireland in the stories; there are certain things that each one of them
may not do without forfeiting life or honour; and it was a _geis_ upon
Fergus to refuse a feast.

Fergus, we are told, "reddened with anger from crown to sole" at the
invitation. Yet he could not avoid the feast. He asked Naoise what he
should do, and Deirdre broke in with: "Do what is asked of you if you
prefer to forsake the sons of Usnach for a feast. Yet forsaking them is
a good price to pay for it."

Fergus, however, perceived a possible compromise. Though he himself
could not refuse to stop to partake of Borrach's hospitality, he could
send Deirdre and the sons of Usnach on to Emain Macha at once, under the
safeguard of his two sons, Illann the Fair and Buinne the Ruthless Red.
So this was done, albeit to the annoyance of the sons of Usnach and the
terror of Deirdre. Visions came to the sorrowful woman; she saw the
three sons of Usnach and Illann, the son of Fergus, without their heads;
she saw a cloud of blood always hanging over them. She begged them to
wait in some safe place until Fergus had finished the feast. But Naoise,
Ainle, and Ardan laughed at her fears. They arrived at Emain Macha, and
Conchobar ordered the "Red Branch" palace to be placed at their
disposal.

In the evening Conchobar called Levarcham, Deirdre's old teacher, to
him. "Go", he said, "to the Red Branch', and see Deirdre, and bring me
back news of her appearance, whether she still keeps her former beauty,
or whether it has left her."

So Levarcham came to the "Red Branch", and kissed Deirdre and the three
sons of Usnach, and warned them that Conchobar was preparing treachery.
Then she went back to the king, and reported to him that Deirdre's hard
life upon the mountains of Alba had ruined her form and face, so that
she was no longer worthy of his regard.

At this, Conchobar's jealousy was partly allayed, and he began to doubt
whether it would be wise to attack the sons of Usnach. But later on,
when he had drunk well of wine, he sent a second messenger to see if
what Levarcham had reported about Deirdre was truth.

The messenger, this time a man, went and looked in through a window.
Deirdre saw him and pointed him out to Naoise, who flung a chessman at
the peering face, and put out one of its eyes. But the man went back to
Conchobar, and told him that, though one of his eyes had been struck
out, he would gladly have stayed looking with the other, so great was
Deirdre's loveliness.

Then Conchobar, in his wrath, ordered the men of Ulster to set fire to
the Red Branch House and slay all within it except Deirdre. They flung
fire-brands upon it, but Buinne the Ruthless Red came out and quenched
them, and drove the assailants back with slaughter. But Conchobar called
to him to parley, and offered him a "hundred" of land and his friendship
to desert the sons of Usnach. Buinne was tempted, and fell; but the land
given him turned barren that very night in indignation at being owned by
such a traitor.

The other of Fergus's sons was of different make. He charged out, torch
in hand, and cut down the Ultonians, so that they hesitated to come near
the house again. Conchobar dared not offer him a bribe. But he armed his
own son, Fiacha, with his own magic weapons, including his shield, the
"Moaner", which roared when its owner was in danger, and sent him to
fight Illann.

The duel was a fierce one, and Illann got the better of Fiacha, so that
the son of Conchobar had to crouch down beneath his shield, which roared
for help. Conall the Victorious heard the roar from far off, and thought
that his king must be in peril. He came to the place, and, without
asking questions, thrust his spear "Blue-green" through Illann. The
dying son of Fergus explained the situation to Conall, who, by way of
making some amends, at once killed Fiacha as well.

After this, the sons of Usnach held their fort till dawn against all
Conchobar's host. But, with day, they saw that they must either escape
or resign themselves to perish. Putting Deirdre in their centre,
protected by their shields, they opened the door suddenly and fled out.

They would have broken through and escaped, had not Conchobar asked
Cathbad the Druid to put a spell upon them, promising to spare their
lives. So Cathbad raised the illusion of a stormy sea before and all
around the sons of Usnach. Naoise lifted Deirdre upon his shoulder, but
the magic waves rose higher, until they were all obliged to fling away
their weapons and swim.

Then was seen the strange sight of men swimming upon dry land. And,
before the glamour passed away, the sons of Usnach were seized from
behind, and brought to Conchobar.

In spite of his promise to the druid, the king condemned them to death.
None of the men of Ulster would, however, deal the blow. In the end, a
foreigner from Norway, whose father Naoise had slain, offered to behead
them. Each of the brothers begged to die first, that he might not
witness the deaths of the others. But Naoise ended this noble rivalry by
lending their executioner the sword called "The Retaliator", which had
been given him by Manannn son of Lr. They knelt down side by side, and
one blow of the sword of the god shore off all their heads.

As for Deirdre, there are varying stories of her death, but most of them
agree that she did not survive the sons of Usnach many hours. But,
before she died, she made an elegy over them. That it is of a singular
pathos and beauty the few verses which there is space to give will
show.[222]

          "Long the day without Usnach's children!
           It was not mournful to be in their company!
           Sons of a king by whom sojourners were entertained,
           Three lions from the Hill of the Cave.

              *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

          "Three darlings of the women of Britain,
           Three hawks of Slieve Gullion,
           Sons of a king whom valour served,
           To whom soldiers used to give homage!

              *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

          "That I should remain after Naoise
           Let no one in the world suppose:
           After Ardan and Ainle
           My time would not be long.

          "Ulster's over-king, my first husband,
           I forsook for Naoise's love.
           Short my life after them:
           I will perform their funeral game.

          "After them I shall not be alive-
           Three that would go into every conflict,
           Three who liked to endure hardships,
           Three heroes who refused not combats.

              *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

          "O man, that diggest the tomb
           And puttest my darling from me,
           Make not the grave too narrow:
           I shall be beside the noble ones."

It was a poor triumph for Conchobar. Deirdre in all her beauty had
escaped him by death. His own chief followers never forgave it. Fergus,
when he returned from Borrach's feast, and found out what had been done,
gathered his own people, slew Conchobar's son and many of his warriors,
and fled to Ulster's bitterest enemies, Ailill and Medb of Connaught.
And Cathbad the Druid cursed both king and kingdom, praying that none of
Conchobar's race might ever reign in Emain Macha again.

So it came to pass. The capital of Ulster was only kept from ruin by
Cuchulainn's prowess. When he perished, it also fell, and soon became
what it is now-a grassy hill.

-----

Footnote 216:

  The romance of the _Wooing of Emer_, a fragment of which is contained
  in the Book of the Dun Cow, has been translated by Dr. Kuno Meyer, and
  published by him in the _Archological Review_, Vol. I, 1888. Miss
  Hull has included this translation in her _Cuchullin Saga_. Another
  version of it from a Bodleian MS., translated by the same scholar,
  will be found in the _Revue Celtique_, Vol. XI.

Footnote 217:

  This story, known as the _Sick-Bed of Cuchulainn_, translated into
  French by M. d'Arbois de Jubainville, will be found in his _L'pope
  Celtique en Irlande_, the fifth volume of _Cour de Littrature
  Celtique_. Another translation, into English, by Eugene O'Curry is in
  _Atlantis_, Vols. I and II.

Footnote 218:

  For the full story of Baile and Ailinn see Dr. Kuno Meyer's
  translation in Vol. XIII of the _Revue Celtique_.

Footnote 219:

  There are not only numerous translations of this romance, but also
  many Gaelic versions. The oldest of the latter is in the Book of
  Leinster, while the fullest are in two MSS. in the Advocates' Library
  at Edinburgh. The version followed here is from one of these, the
  so-called Glenn Masin MS., translated by Dr. Whitley Stokes, and
  contained in Miss Hull's _Cuchullin Saga_.

Footnote 220:

  Pronounced _Naisi_.

Footnote 221:

  Pronounced _Usna_.

Footnote 222:

  It will be found in full in Miss Hull's _Cuchullin Saga_. The version
  there given was first translated into French by M. Ponsinet from the
  Book of Leinster.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XIV

                       FINN AND THE FENIANS[223]


The epoch of Emain Macha is followed in the annals of ancient Ireland by
a succession of monarchs who, though doubtless as mythical as King
Conchobar and his court, seem to grow gradually more human. Their line
lasts for about two centuries, culminating in a dynasty with which
legend has occupied itself more than with its immediate predecessors.
This is the one which began, according to the annalists, in A.D. 177,
with the famous Conn "the Hundred-Fighter", and, passing down to the
reign of his even more famous grandson, Cormac "the Magnificent", is
connected with the third Gaelic cycle-that which relates the exploits of
Finn and the Fenians. All these kings had their dealings with the
national gods. A story contained in a fifteenth-century Irish
manuscript, and called "The Champion's Prophecy",[224] tells how Lugh
appeared to Conn, enveloped him in a magic mist, led him away to an
enchanted palace, and there prophesied to him the number of his
descendants, the length of their reigns, and the manner of their deaths.
Another tradition relates how Conn's son, Connla, was wooed by a goddess
and borne away, like the British Arthur, in a boat of glass to the
Earthly Paradise beyond the sea.[225] Yet another relates Conn's own
marriage with Becuma of the Fair Skin, wife of that same Labraid of the
Quick Hand on Sword who, in another legend, married Liban, the sister of
Fand, Cuchulainn's fairy love. Becuma had been discovered in an intrigue
with Gaiar, a son of Manannn, and, banished from the "Land of Promise",
crossed the sea that sunders mortals and immortals to offer her hand to
Conn. The Irish king wedded her, but evil came of the marriage. She grew
jealous of Conn's other son, Art, and insisted upon his banishment; but
they agreed to play chess to decide which should go, and Art won. Art,
called "the Lonely" because he had lost his brother Connla, was king
after Conn, but he is chiefly known to legend as the father of Cormac.

Many Irish stories occupy themselves with the fame of Cormac, who is
pictured as a great legislator-a Gaelic Solomon. Certain traditions
credit him with having been the first to believe in a purer doctrine
than the Celtic polytheism, and even with having attempted to put down
druidism, in revenge for which a druid called Maelcen sent an evil
spirit who placed a salmon-bone crossways in the king's throat, as he
sat at meat, and so compassed his death. Another class of stories,
however, make him an especial favourite with those same heathen deities.
Manannn son of Lr, was so anxious for his friendship that he decoyed
him into fairyland, and gave him a magic branch. It was of silver, and
bore golden apples, and, when it was shaken, it made such sweet music
that the wounded, the sick, and the sorrowful forgot their pains, and
were lulled into deep sleep. Cormac kept this treasure all his life;
but, at his death, it returned into the hands of the gods.[226]

King Cormac was a contemporary of Finn mac Coul[227], whom he appointed
head of the _Fianna[228] Eirinn_, more generally known as the "Fenians".
Around Finn and his men have gathered a cycle of legends which were
equally popular with the Gaels of both Scotland and Ireland. We read of
their exploits in stories and poems preserved in the earliest Irish
manuscripts, while among the peasantry both of Ireland and of the West
Highlands their names and the stories connected with them are still
current lore. Upon some of these floating traditions, as preserved in
folk ballads, MacPherson founded his factitious _Ossian_, and the
collection of them from the lips of living men still affords plenty of
employment to Gaelic students.

How far Finn and his followers may have been historical personages it is
impossible to say. The Irish people themselves have always held that the
Fenians were a kind of native militia, and that Finn was their general.
The early historical writers of Ireland supported this view. The
chronicler Tighernach, who died in 1088, believed in him, and the
"Annals of the Four Masters", compiled between the years 1632 and 1636
from older chronicles, while they ignore King Conchobar and his Red
Branch Champions as unworthy of the serious consideration of historians,
treat Finn as a real person whose death took place in 283 A.D. Even so
great a modern scholar as Eugene O'Curry declared in the clearest
language that Finn, so far from being "a merely imaginary or mythical
character", was "an undoubtedly historical personage; and that he
existed about the time at which his appearance is recorded in the Annals
is as certain as that Julius Caesar lived and ruled at the time stated
on the authority of the Roman historians".[229]

The opinion of more recent Celtic scholars, however, is opposed to this
view. Finn's pedigree, preserved in the Book of Leinster, may seem at
first to give some support to the theory of his real existence, but, on
more careful examination of it, his own name and that of his father
equally bewray him. Finn or Fionn, meaning "fair", is the name of one of
the mythical ancestors of the Gaels, while his father's name,
Cumhal[230], signifies the "sky", and is the same word as _Camulus_, the
Gaulish heaven-god identified by the Romans with Mars. His followers are
as doubtfully human as himself. One may compare them with Cuchulainn and
the rest of the heroes of Emain Macha. Their deeds are not less
marvellous. Like the Ultonian warriors, they move, too, on equal terms
with the gods. "The Fianna of Erin", says a tract called "The Dialogue
of the Elders",[231] contained in thirteenth and fourteenth century
manuscripts, "had not more frequent and free intercourse with the men of
settled habitation than with the Tuatha D Danann".[232] Angus, Mider,
Lr, Manannn, and Bodb the Red, with their countless sons and
daughters, loom as large in the Fenian, or so-called "Ossianic" stories
as do the Fenians themselves. They fight for them, or against them; they
marry them, and are given to them in marriage.

A luminous suggestion of Professor Rhys also hints that the Fenians
inherited the conduct of that ancient war formerly waged between the
Tuatha D Danann and the Fomors. The most common antagonists of Finn and
his heroes are tribes of invaders from oversea, called in the stories
the _Lochlannach_. These "Men of Lochlann" are usually identified, by
those who look for history in the stories of the Fenian cycle, with the
invading bands of Norsemen who harried the Irish coasts in the ninth
century. But the nucleus of the Fenian tales antedates these
Scandinavian raids, and mortal foes have probably merely stepped into
the place of those immortal enemies of the gods whose "Lochlann" was a
country, not over the sea-but under it.[233]

The earlier historians of Ireland were as ready with their dates and
facts regarding the Fenian band as an institution as with the
personality of Finn. It was said to have been first organized by a king
called Fiachadh, in 300 B.C., and abolished, or rather, exterminated, by
Cairbr, the son of Cormac mac Art, in 284 _A.D._ We are told that it
consisted of three regiments modelled on the Roman legion; each of these
bodies contained, on a peace footing, three thousand men, but in time of
war could be indefinitely strengthened. Its object was to defend the
coasts of Ireland and the country generally, throwing its weight upon
the side of any prince who happened to be assailed by foreign foes.
During the six months of winter, its members were quartered upon the
population, but during the summer they had to forage for themselves,
which they did by hunting and fishing. Thus they lived in the woods and
on the open moors, hardening themselves for battle by their adventurous
life. The sites of their enormous camp-fires were long pointed out under
the name of the "Fenians' cooking-places".

It was not easy to become a member of this famous band. A candidate had
to be not only an expert warrior, but a poet and a man of culture as
well. He had practically to renounce his tribe; at any rate he made oath
that he would neither avenge any of his relatives nor be avenged by
them. He put himself under bonds never to refuse hospitality to anyone
who asked, never to turn his back in battle, never to insult any woman,
and not to accept a dowry with his wife. In addition to all this, he had
to pass successfully through the most stringent physical tests. Indeed,
as these have come down to us, magnified by the perfervid Celtic
imagination, they are of an altogether marvellous and impossible
character. An aspirant to the _Fianna Eirinn_, we are told, had first to
stand up to his knees in a pit dug for him, his only arms being his
shield and a hazel wand, while nine warriors, each with a spear,
standing within the distance of nine ridges of land, all hurled their
weapons at him at once; if he failed to ward them all off, he was
rejected. Should he succeed in this first test, he was given the
distance of one tree-length's start, and chased through a forest by
armed men; if any of them came up to him and wounded him, he could not
belong to the Fenians. If he escaped unhurt, but had unloosed a single
lock of his braided hair, or had broken a single branch in his flight,
or if, at the end of the run, his weapons trembled in his hands, he was
refused. As, besides these tests, he was obliged to jump over a branch
as high as his forehead, and stoop under one as low as his knee, while
running at full speed, and to pluck a thorn out of his heel without
hindrance to his flight, it is clear that even the rank and file of the
Fenians must have been quite exceptional athletes.[234]

But it is time to pass on to a more detailed description of these
champions.[235] They are a goodly company, not less heroic than the
mighty men of Ulster. First comes Finn himself, not the strongest in
body of the Fenians, but the truest, wisest, and kindest, gentle to
women, generous to men, and trusted by all. If he could help it, he
would never let anyone be in trouble or poverty. "If the dead leaves of
the forest had been gold, and the white foam of the water silver, Finn
would have given it all away."

Finn had two sons, Fergus and his more famous brother Ossian[236].
Fergus of the sweet speech was the Fenian's bard, and, also, because of
his honeyed words, their diplomatist and ambassador. Yet, by the irony
of fate, it is to Ossian, who is not mentioned as a poet in the earliest
texts, that the poems concerning the Fenians which are current in
Scotland under the name of "Ossianic Ballads" are attributed. Ossian's
mother was Sadb, a daughter of Bodb the Red. A rival goddess changed her
into a deer-which explains how Ossian got his name, which means "fawn".
With such advantages of birth, naturally he was speedy enough to run
down a red deer hind and catch her by the ear, though far less
swift-footed than his cousin Caoilte[237], the "Thin Man". Neither was
he so strong as his own son Oscar, the mightiest of all the Fenians,
yet, in his youth, so clumsy that the rest of the band refused to take
him with them on their warlike expeditions. They changed their minds,
however, when, one day, he followed them unawares, found them giving way
before an enemy, and, rushing to their help, armed only with a great log
of wood which lay handy on the ground, turned the fortunes of the fight.
After this, Oscar was hailed the best warrior of all the Fianna; he was
given command of a battalion, and its banner, called the "Terrible
Broom", was regarded as the centre of every battle, for it was never
known to retreat a foot. Other prominent Fenians were Goll[238], son of
Morna, at first Finn's enemy but afterwards his follower, a man skilled
alike in war and learning. Even though he was one-eyed, we are told that
he was much loved by women, but not so much as Finn's cousin, Diarmait
O'Duibhne[239], whose fatal beauty ensnared even Finn's betrothed bride,
Grainne[240]. Their comic character was Conan, who is represented as an
old, bald, vain, irritable man, as great a braggart as ancient Pistol
and as foul-mouthed as Thersites, and yet, after he had once been shamed
into activity, a true man of his hands. These are the prime Fenian
heroes, the chief actors in its stories.

The Fenian epic begins, before the birth of its hero, with the struggle
of two rival clans, each of whom claimed to be the real and only Fianna
Eirinn. They were called the Clann Morna, of which Goll mac Morna was
head, and the Clann Baoisgne[241], commanded by Finn's father, Cumhal. A
battle was fought at Cnucha[242], in which Goll killed Cumhal, and the
Clann Baoisgne was scattered. Cumhal's wife, however, bore a posthumous
son, who was brought up among the Slieve Bloom Mountains secretly, for
fear his father's enemies should find and kill him. The boy, who was at
first called Deimne[243], grew up to be an expert hurler, swimmer,
runner, and hunter. Later, like Cuchulainn, and indeed many modern
savages, he took a second, more personal name. Those who saw him asked
who was the "fair" youth. He accepted the omen, and called himself
Deimne Finn.

At length, he wandered to the banks of the Boyne, where he found a
soothsayer called Finn the Seer living beside a deep pool near Slane,
named "Fec's Pool", in hope of catching one of the "salmons of
knowledge", and, by eating it, obtaining universal wisdom. He had been
there seven years without result, though success had been prophesied to
one named "Finn". When the wandering son of Cumhal appeared, Finn the
Seer engaged him as his servant. Shortly afterwards, he caught the
coveted fish, and handed it over to our Finn to cook, warning him to eat
no portion of it. "Have you eaten any of it?" he asked the boy, as he
brought it up ready boiled. "No indeed," replied Finn; "but, while I was
cooking it, a blister rose upon the skin, and, laying my thumb down upon
the blister, I scalded it, and so I put it into my mouth to ease the
pain." The man was perplexed. "You told me your name was Deimne," he
said; "but have you any other name?" "Yes, I am also called Finn." "It
is enough," replied his disappointed master. "Eat the salmon yourself,
for you must be the one of whom the prophecy told." Finn ate the "salmon
of knowledge", and thereafter he had only to put his thumb under his
tooth, as he had done when he scalded it, to receive fore-knowledge and
magic counsel.[244]

Thus armed, Finn was more than a match for the Clann Morna. Curious
legends tell how he discovered himself to his father's old followers,
confounded his enemies with his magic, and turned them into faithful
servants.[245] Even Goll of the Blows had to submit to his sway.
Gradually he welded the two opposing clans into one Fianna, over which
he ruled, taking tribute from the kings of Ireland, warring against the
Fomorian "Lochlannach", destroying every kind of giant, serpent, or
monster that infested the land, and at last carrying his mythical
conquests over all Europe.

Out of the numberless stories of the Fenian exploits it is hard to
choose examples. All are heroic, romantic, wild, fantastic. In many of
them the Tuatha D Danann play prominent parts. One such story connects
itself with an earlier mythological episode already related. The reader
will remember[246] how, when the Dagda gave up the kingship of the
immortals, five aspirants appeared to claim it; how of these five-Angus,
Mider, Lr, Ilbhreach son of Manannn, and Bodb the Red-the latter was
chosen; how Lr refused to acknowledge him, but was reconciled later;
how Mider, equally rebellious, fled to "desert country round Mount
Leinster" in County Carlow; and how a yearly war was waged upon him and
his people by the rest of the gods to bring them to subjection. This war
was still raging in the time of Finn, and Mider was not too proud to
seek his help. One day that Finn was hunting in Donegal, with Ossian,
Oscar, Caoilte, and Diarmait, their hounds roused a beautiful fawn,
which, although at every moment apparently nearly overtaken, led them in
full chase as far as Mount Leinster. Here it suddenly disappeared into a
cleft in the hillside. Heavy snow, "making the forest's branches as it
were a withe-twist", now fell, forcing the Fenians to seek for some
shelter, and they therefore explored the place into which the fawn had
vanished. It led to a splendid _sdh_ in the hollow of the hill.
Entering it, they were greeted by a beautiful goddess-maiden, who told
them that it was she, Mider's daughter, who had been the fawn, and that
she had taken that shape purposely to lead them there, in the hope of
getting their help against the army that was coming to attack the
_sdh_. Finn asked who the assailants would be, and was told that they
were Bodb the Red with his seven sons, Angus "Son of the Young" with his
seven sons, Lr of Sdh Fionnechaidh with his twenty-seven sons, and
Fionnbharr of Sdh Meadha with his seventeen sons, as well as numberless
gods of lesser fame drawn from _sdhe_ not only over all Ireland, but
from Scotland and the islands as well. Finn promised his aid, and, with
the twilight of that same day, the attacking forces appeared, and made
their annual assault. They were beaten off, after a battle that lasted
all night, with the loss of "ten men, ten score, and ten hundred". Finn,
Oscar, and Diarmait, as well as most of Mider's many sons, were sorely
wounded, but the leech Labhra healed all their wounds.[247]

Sooth to say, the Fenians did not always require the excuse of fairy
alliance to start them making war on the race of the hills. One of the
so-called "Ossianic ballads" is entitled "The Chase of the Enchanted
Pigs of Angus of the Brugh[248]". This Angus is, of course, the "Son of
the Young", and the Brugh that famous _sdh_ beside the Boyne out of
which he cheated his father, the Dagda. After the friendly manner of
gods towards heroes, he invited Finn and a picked thousand of his
followers to a banquet at the Brugh. They came to it in their finest
clothes, "goblets went from hand to hand, and waiters were kept in
motion". At last conversation fell upon the comparative merits of the
pleasures of the table and of the chase, Angus stoutly contending that
"the gods' life of perpetual feasting" was better than all the Fenian
huntings, and Finn as stoutly denying it. Finn boasted of his hounds,
and Angus said that the best of them could not kill one of his pigs.
Finn angrily replied that his two hounds, Bran[249] and Sgeolan[250],
would kill any pig that trod on dry land. Angus answered that he could
show Finn a pig that none of his hounds or huntsmen could catch or kill.
Here were the makings of a pretty quarrel among such inflammable
creatures as gods and heroes, but the steward of the feast interposed
and sent everyone to bed. The next morning, Finn left the Brugh, for he
did not want to fight all Angus's fairies with his handful of a thousand
men. A year passed before he heard more of it; then came a messenger
from Angus, reminding Finn of his promise to pit his men and hounds
against Angus's pigs. The Fenians seated themselves on the tops of the
hills, each with his favourite hound in leash, and they had not been
there long before there appeared on the eastern plain a hundred and one
such pigs as no Fenian had ever seen before. Each was as tall as a deer,
and blacker than a smith's coals, having hair like a thicket and
bristles like ships' masts. Yet such was the prowess of the Fenians that
they killed them all, though each of the pigs slew ten men and many
hounds. Then Angus complained that the Fenians had murdered his son and
many others of the Tuatha D Danann, who, indeed, were none other than
the pigs whose forms they had taken. There were mighty recriminations on
both sides, and, in the end, the enraged Fenians prepared to attack the
Brugh on the Boyne. Then only did Angus begin to yield, and, by the
advice of Ossian, Finn made peace with him and his fairy folk.

Such are specimens of the tales which go to make up the Fenian cycle of
sagas. Hunting is the most prominent feature of them, for the Fenians
were essentially a race of mighty hunters. But the creatures of their
chase were not always flesh and blood. Enchanters who wished the Fenians
ill could always lure them into danger by taking the shape of boar or
deer, and many a story begins with an innocent chase and ends with a
murderous battle. But out of such struggles the Fenians always emerge
successfully, as Ossian is represented proudly boasting, "through
truthfulness and the might of their hands".

The most famous chase of all is, however, not that of deer or boar, but
of a woman and a man, Finn's betrothed wife and his nephew
Diarmait.[251] Ever fortunate in war, the Fenian leader found disaster
in his love. Wishing for a wife in his old age, he sent to seek Grainne,
the daughter of Cormac, the High-King of Ireland. Both King Cormac and
his daughter consented, and Finn's ambassadors returned with an
invitation to the suitor to come in a fortnight's time to claim his
bride. He arrived with his picked band, and was received in state in the
great banqueting-hall of Tara. There they feasted, and there Grainne,
the king's daughter, casting her eyes over the assembled Fenian heroes,
saw Diarmait O'Duibhne.

This Fenian Adonis had a beauty-spot upon his cheek which no woman could
see without falling instantly in love with him. Grainne, for all her
royal birth, was no exception to this rule. She asked a druid to point
her out the principal guests. The druid told her all their names and
exploits. Then she called for a jewelled drinking-horn, and, filling it
with a drugged wine, sent it round to each in turn, except to Diarmait.
None could be so discourteous as to refuse wine from the hand of a
princess. All drank, and fell into deep sleep.

Then, rising, she came to Diarmait, told him her passion for him, and
asked for its return. "I will not love the betrothed of my chief," he
replied, "and, even if I wished, I dare not." And he praised Finn's
virtues, and decried his own fame. But Grainne merely answered that she
put him under _geasa_ (bonds which no hero could refuse to redeem) to
flee with her; and at once went back to her chair before the rest of the
company awoke from their slumber.

After the feast, Diarmait went round to his comrades, one by one, and
told them of Grainne's love for him, and of the _geasa_ she had placed
upon him to take her from Tara. He asked each of them what he ought to
do. All answered that no hero could break a _geis_ put upon him by a
woman. He even asked Finn, concealing Grainne's name, and Finn gave him
the same counsel as the others. That night, the lovers fled from Tara to
the ford of the Shannon at Athlone, crossed it, and came to a place
called the "Wood of the Two Tents", where Diarmait wove a hut of
branches for Grainne to shelter in.

Meanwhile Finn had discovered their flight, and his rage knew no bounds.
He sent his trackers, the Clann Neamhuain[252], to follow them. They
tracked them to the wood, and one of them climbed a tree, and, looking
down, saw the hut, with a strong seven-doored fence built round it, and
Diarmait and Grainne inside. When the news came to the Fenians, they
were sorry, for their sympathies were with Diarmait and not with Finn.
They tried to warn him, but he took no heed; for he had determined to
fight and not to flee. Indeed, when Finn himself came to the fence, and
called over it to Diarmait, asking if he and Grainne were within, he
replied that they were, but that none should enter unless he gave
permission.

So Diarmait, like Cuchulainn in the war of Ulster against Ireland, found
himself matched single-handed against a host. But, also like Cuchulainn,
he had a divine helper. The favourite of the Tuatha D Danann, he had
been the pupil of Manannn son of Lr in the "Land of Promise", and had
been fostered by Angus of the Brugh. Manannn had given him his two
spears, the "Red Javelin" and the "Yellow Javelin", and his two swords,
the "Great Fury" and the "Little Fury". And now Angus came to look for
his foster-son, and brought with him the magic mantle of invisibility
used by the gods. He advised Diarmait and Grainne to come out wrapped in
the cloak, and thus rendered invisible. Diarmait still refused to flee,
but asked Angus to protect Grainne. Wrapping the magic mantle round her,
the god led the princess away unseen by any of the Fenians.

By this time, Finn had posted men outside all the seven doors in the
fence. Diarmait went to each of them in turn. At the first, were Ossian
and Oscar with the Clann Baoisgne. They offered him their protection. At
the second, were Caoilte and the Clann Ronan, who said they would fight
to the death for him. At the third, were Conan and the Clann Morna, also
his friends. At the fourth, stood Cuan with the Fenians of Munster,
Diarmait's native province. At the fifth, were the Ulster Fenians, who
also promised him protection against Finn. But at the sixth, were the
Clann Neamhuain, who hated him; and at the seventh, was Finn himself.

"It is by your door that I will pass out, O Finn," cried Diarmait. Finn
charged his men to surround Diarmait as he came out, and kill him. But
he leaped the fence, passing clean over their heads, and fled away so
swiftly that they could not follow him. He never halted till he reached
the place to which he knew Angus had taken Grainne. The friendly god
left them with a little sage advice: never to hide in a tree with only
one trunk; never to rest in a cave with only one entrance; never to land
on an island with only one channel of approach; not to eat their supper
where they had cooked it, nor to sleep where they had supped, and, where
they had slept once, never to sleep again. With these Red-Indian-like
tactics, it was some time before Finn discovered them.

However, he found out at last where they were, and sent champions with
venomous hounds to take or kill them. But Diarmait conquered all who
were sent against him.

Yet still Finn pursued, until Diarmait, as a last hope of escape, took
refuge under a magic quicken-tree[253], which bore scarlet fruit, the
ambrosia of the gods. It had grown from a single berry dropped by one of
the Tuatha D Danann, who, when they found that they had carelessly
endowed mortals with celestial and immortal food, had sent a huge,
one-eyed Fomor called Sharvan the Surly to guard it, so that no man
might eat of its fruit. All day, this Fomor sat at the foot of the tree,
and, all night, he slept among its branches, and so terrible was his
appearance that neither the Fenians nor any other people dared to come
within several miles of him.

But Diarmait was willing to brave the Fomor in the hope of getting a
safe hiding-place for Grainne. He came boldly up to him, and asked leave
to camp and hunt in his neighbourhood. The Fomor told him surlily that
he might camp and hunt where he pleased, so long as he refrained from
taking any of the scarlet berries. So Diarmait built a hut near a
spring; and he and Grainne lived there, killing the wild animals for
food.

But, unhappily, Grainne conceived so strong a desire to eat the quicken
berries that she felt that she must die unless her wish could be
gratified. At first she tried to hide this longing, but in the end she
was forced to tell her companion. Diarmait had no desire to quarrel with
the Fomor; so he went to him and told the plight that Grainne was in,
and asked for a handful of the berries as a gift.

But the Fomor merely answered: "I swear to you that if nothing would
save the princess and her unborn child except my berries, and if she
were the last woman upon the earth, she should not have any of them."
Whereupon Diarmait fought the Fomor, and, after much trouble, killed
him.

It was reported to Finn that the guardian of the magic quicken-tree
lived no longer, and he guessed that Diarmait must have killed him; so
he came down to the place with seven battalions of the Fenians to look
for him. By this time, Diarmait had abandoned his own hut and taken
possession of that built by the Fomor among the branches of the magic
quicken. He was sitting in it with Grainne when Finn and his men came
and camped at the foot of the tree, to wait till the heat of noon had
passed before beginning their search.

To beguile the time, Finn called for his chess-board and challenged his
son Ossian to a game. They played until Ossian had only one more move.

"One move would make you a winner," said Finn to him, "but I challenge
you and all the Fenians to guess it."

Only Diarmait, who had been looking down through the branches upon the
players, knew the move. He could not resist dropping a berry on to the
board, so deftly that it hit the very chess-man which Ossian ought to
move in order to win. Ossian took the hint, moved it, and won. A second
and a third game were played; and in each case the same thing happened.
Then Finn felt sure that the berries that had prompted Ossian must have
been thrown by Diarmait.

He called out, asking Diarmait if he were there, and the Fenian hero,
who never spoke an untruth, answered that he was. So the quicken-tree
was surrounded by armed men, just as the fenced hut in the woods had
been. But, again, things happened in the same way; for Angus of the
Brugh took away Grainne wrapped in the invisible magic cloak, while
Diarmait, walking to the end of a thick branch, cleared the circle of
Fenians at a bound, and escaped untouched.

This was the end of the famous "Pursuit"; for Angus came as ambassador
to Finn, urging him to become reconciled to the fugitives, and all the
best of the Fenians begged Finn to consent. So Diarmait and Grainne were
allowed to return in peace.

But Finn never really forgave, and, soon after, he urged Diarmait to go
out to the chase of the wild boar of Benn Gulban[254]. Diarmait killed
the boar without getting any hurt; for, like the Greek Achilles, he was
invulnerable, save in his heel alone. Finn, who knew this, told him to
measure out the length of the skin with his bare feet. Diarmait did so.
Then Finn, declaring that he had measured it wrongly, ordered him to
tread it again in the opposite direction. This was against the lie of
the bristles; and one of them pierced Diarmait's heel, and inflicted a
poisoned and mortal wound.

This "Pursuit of Diarmait and Grainne", which has been told at such
length, marks in some degree the climax of the Fenian power, after which
it began to decline towards its end. The friends of Diarmait never
forgave the treachery with which Finn had compassed his death. The
ever-slumbering rivalry between Goll and his Clann Morna and Finn and
his Clann Baoisgne began to show itself as open enmity. Quarrels arose,
too, between the Fenians and the High-Kings of Ireland, which culminated
at last in the annihilation of the Fianna at the battle of Gabhra[255].

This is said to have been fought in A.D. 284. Finn himself had perished
a year before it, in a skirmish with rebellious Fenians at the Ford of
Brea on the Boyne. King Cormac the Magnificent, Grainne's father, was
also dead. It was between Finn's grandson Oscar and Cormac's son Cairbr
that war broke out. This mythical battle was as fiercely waged as that
of Arthur's last fight at Camlan. Oscar slew Cairbr, and was slain by
him. Almost all the Fenians fell, as well as all Cairbr's forces.

Only two of the greater Fenian figures survived. One was Caoilte, whose
swiftness of foot saved him at the end when all was lost. The famous
story, called the "Dialogue of the Elders", represents him discoursing
to St. Patrick, centuries after, of the Fenians' wonderful deeds. Having
lost his friends of the heroic age, he is said to have cast in his lot
with the Tuatha D Danann. He fought in a battle, with Ilbhreach son of
Manannn, against Lr himself, and killed the ancient sea-god with his
own hand.[256] The tale represents him taking possession of Lr's fairy
palace of Sdh Fionnechaidh, after which we know no more of him, except
that he has taken rank in the minds of the Irish peasantry as one of,
and a ruler among, the Sdhe.

The other was Ossian, who did not fight at Gabhra, for, long before, he
had taken the great journey which most heroes of mythology take, to that
bourne from which no ordinary mortal ever returns. Like Cuchulainn, it
was upon the invitation of a goddess that he went. The Fenians were
hunting near Lake Killarney when a lady of more than human beauty came
to them, and told them that her name was Niamh[257], daughter of the Son
of the Sea. The Gaelic poet, Michael Comyn, who, in the eighteenth
century, rewove the ancient story into his own words,[258] describes her
in just the same way as one of the old bards would have done:

          "A royal crown was on her head;
           And a brown mantle of precious silk,
           Spangled with stars of red gold,
           Covering her shoes down to the grass.

          "A gold ring was hanging down
           From each yellow curl of her golden hair;
           Her eyes, blue, clear, and cloudless,
           Like a dew-drop on the top of the grass.

          "Redder were her cheeks than the rose,
           Fairer was her visage than the swan upon the wave,
           And more sweet was the taste of her balsam lips
           Than honey mingled thro' red wine.

          "A garment, wide, long, and smooth
           Covered the white steed,
           There was a comely saddle of red gold,
           And her right hand held a bridle with a golden bit.

          "Four shoes well-shaped were under him,
           Of the yellow gold of the purest quality;
           A silver wreath was on the back of his head,
           And there was not in the world a steed better."

Such was Niamh of the Golden Hair, Manannn's daughter; and it is small
wonder that, when she chose Ossian from among the sons of men to be her
lover, all Finn's supplications could not keep him. He mounted behind
her on her fairy horse, and they rode across the land to the sea-shore,
and then over the tops of the waves. As they went, she described the
country of the gods to him in just the same terms as Manannn himself
had pictured it to Bran, son of Febal, as Mider had painted it to Etain,
and as everyone that went there limned it to those that stayed at home
on earth.

        "It is the most delightful country to be found
         Of greatest repute under the sun;
         Trees drooping with fruit and blossom,
         And foliage growing on the tops of boughs.

        "Abundant, there, are honey and wine,
         And everything that eye has beheld,
         There will not come decline on thee with lapse of time.
         Death or decay thou wilt not see."

As they went they saw wonders. Fairy palaces with bright sun-bowers and
lime-white walls appeared on the surface of the sea. At one of these
they halted, and Ossian, at Niamh's request, attacked a fierce Fomor who
lived there, and set free a damsel of the Tuatha D Danann whom he kept
imprisoned. He saw a hornless fawn leap from wave to wave, chased by one
of those strange hounds of Celtic myth which are pure white, with red
ears. At last they reached the "Land of the Young", and there Ossian
dwelt with Niamh for three hundred years before he remembered Erin and
the Fenians. Then a great wish came upon him to see his own country and
his own people again, and Niamh gave him leave to go, and mounted him
upon a fairy steed for the journey. One thing alone she made him
swear-not to let his feet touch earthly soil. Ossian promised, and
reached Ireland on the wings of the wind. But, like the children of Lr
at the end of their penance, he found all changed. He asked for Finn and
the Fenians, and was told that they were the names of people who had
lived long ago, and whose deeds were written of in old books. The Battle
of Gabhra had been fought, and St. Patrick had come to Ireland, and made
all things new. The very forms of men had altered; they seemed dwarfs
compared with the giants of his day. Seeing three hundred of them trying
in vain to raise a marble slab, he rode up to them in contemptuous
kindness, and lifted it with one hand. But, as he did so, the golden
saddle-girth broke with the strain, and he touched the earth with his
feet. The fairy horse vanished, and Ossian rose from the ground, no
longer divinely young and fair and strong, but a blind, gray-haired,
withered old man.

A number of spirited ballads[259] tell how Ossian, stranded in his old
age upon earthly soil, unable to help himself or find his own food, is
taken by St. Patrick into his house to be converted. The saint paints to
him in the brightest colours the heaven which may be his own if he will
but repent, and in the darkest the hell in which he tells him his old
comrades now lie in anguish. Ossian replies to the saint's arguments,
entreaties, and threats in language which is extraordinarily frank. He
will not believe that heaven could be closed to the Fenians if they
wished to enter it, or that God himself would not be proud to claim
friendship with Finn. And if it be not so, what is the use to him of
eternal life where there is no hunting, or wooing fair women, or
listening to the songs and tales of bards? No, he will go to the
Fenians, whether they sit at the feast or in the fire; and so he dies as
he had lived.

-----

Footnote 223:

  The translations of Fenian stories are numerous. The reader will find
  many of them popularly retold in Lady Gregory's _Gods and Fighting
  Men_. Thence he may pass on to Mr. Standish Hayes O'Grady's _Silva
  Gadelica_; the _Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition_, especially Vol.
  IV; Mr. J. G. Campbell's _The Fians_; as well as the volumes of the
  _Revue Celtique_ and the _Transactions of the Ossianic Society_.

Footnote 224:

  See O'Curry's translation in Appendix CXXVIII to his _MS. Materials_.

Footnote 225:

  The story, found in the Book of the Dun Cow, appears in French in De
  Jubainville's _pope Celtique_.

Footnote 226:

  This famous story is told in several MSS. of the fourteenth and
  fifteenth centuries. For translations see Dr. Whitley Stokes, _Irische
  Texte_, and Standish Hayes O'Grady, _Transactions of the Ossianic
  Society_, Vol. III.

Footnote 227:

  In Gaelic spelling, Fionn mac Cumhail.

Footnote 228:

  Pronounced _Fna_.

Footnote 229:

  O'Curry: _MS. Materials_, Lecture XIV, p. 303.

Footnote 230:

  Pronounced _Coul_ or _Cooal_.

Footnote 231:

  _Agalamh na Senrach._ Under the title _The Colloquy of the Ancients_,
  there is an excellent translation of it, from the Book of Lismore, in
  Standish Hayes O'Grady's _Silva Gadelica_.

Footnote 232:

  O'Grady: _Silva Gadelica_.

Footnote 233:

  _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 355.

Footnote 234:

  See _The Enumeration of Finn's Household_, translated by O'Grady in
  _Silva Gadelica_.

Footnote 235:

  For a good account, see J. G. Campbell's _The Fians_, pp. 10-80.

Footnote 236:

  In more correct spelling, _Oisin_, and pronounced _Usheen_ or
  _Isheen_.

Footnote 237:

  Pronounced _Kylta_ or _Cweeltia_.

Footnote 238:

  Pronounced _Gaul_.

Footnote 239:

  Pronounced _Dermat O'Dyna_.

Footnote 240:

  Pronounced _Grania_.

Footnote 241:

  Pronounced _Baskin_.

Footnote 242:

  Now Castleknock, near Dublin.

Footnote 243:

  Pronounced _Demna_.

Footnote 244:

  This and other "boy-exploits" of Finn mac Cumhail are contained in a
  little tract written upon a fragment of the ninth century Psalter of
  Cashel. It is translated in Vol. IV of the _Transactions of the
  Ossianic Society_.

Footnote 245:

  Campbell's _Fians_, p. 22.

Footnote 246:

  See chap. XI-"The Gods in Exile".

Footnote 247:

  From the _Colloquy of the Ancients_ in O'Grady's _Silva Gadelica_.

Footnote 248:

  It is translated in Vol. VI of the _Transactions of the Ossianic
  Society_.

Footnote 249:

  Pronounced _Brn_, not _Brn_.

Footnote 250:

  Pronounced _Sklaun_ or _Scolaing_.

Footnote 251:

  A fine translation of the _Pursuit of Diarmait and Grainne_ has been
  published by S. H. O'Grady in Vol. III of the _Transactions of the
  Ossianic Society_.

Footnote 252:

  Pronounced _Navin_ or _Nowin_.

Footnote 253:

  The mountain-ash, or rowan.

Footnote 254:

  Now called Benbulben. It is near Sligo.

Footnote 255:

  Pronounced _Gavra_.

Footnote 256:

  See O'Grady's _Silva Gadelica_.

Footnote 257:

  Pronounced _Nee-av_.

Footnote 258:

  _The Lay of Oisin in the Land of Youth_, translated by Brian O'Looney
  for the Ossianic Society-_Transactions_, Vol. IV. A fine modern poem
  on the same subject is W. B. Yeats' _Wanderings of Oisin_.

Footnote 259:

  See the _Transactions of the Ossianic Society_. They are generally
  called the _Dialogues of Oisin and Patrick_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER XV

                    THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE GODS


In spite, however, of the wide-spread popularity of the ballads that
took the form of dialogues between Ossian and Patrick, certain
traditions say that the saint succeeded in converting the hero. Caoilt,
the other great surviving Fenian, was also represented as having gladly
exchanged his pagan lore for the faith and salvation offered him. We may
see the same influence on foot in the later legends concerning the Red
Branch Champions. It was the policy of the first Christianizers of
Ireland to describe the loved heroes of their still half-heathen flocks
as having handed in their submission to the new creed. The tales about
Conchobar and Cuchulainn were amended, to prove that those very pagan
personages had been miraculously brought to accept the gospel at the
last. An entirely new story told how the latter hero was raised from the
dead by Saint Patrick that he might bear witness of the truth of
Christianity to Laogaire the Second, King of Ireland, which he did with
such fervour and eloquence that the sceptical monarch was
convinced.[260]

Daring attempts were also made to change the Tuatha D Danann from pagan
gods into Christian saints, but these were by no means so profitable as
the policy pursued towards the more human-seeming heroes. With one of
them alone, was success immediate and brilliant. Brigit, the goddess of
fire, poetry, and the hearth, is famous to-day as Saint Bridget, or
Bride. Most popular of all the Irish saints, she can still be easily
recognized as the daughter of the Dagda. Her Christian attributes,
almost all connected with fire, attest her pagan origin.[261] She was
born at sunrise; a house in which she dwelt blazed into a flame which
reached to heaven; a pillar of fire rose from her head when she took the
veil; and her breath gave new life to the dead. As with the British
goddess Sul, worshipped at Bath, who-the first century Latin writer
Solinus[262] tells us-"ruled over the boiling springs, and at her altar
there flamed a perpetual fire which never whitened into ashes, but
hardened into a stony mass", the sacred flame on her shrine at Kildare
was never allowed to go out. It was extinguished once, in the thirteenth
century, but was relighted, and burnt with undying glow until the
suppression of the monasteries by Henry the Eighth. This sacred fire
might not be breathed on by the impure human breath. For nineteen nights
it was tended by her nuns, but on the twentieth night it was left
untouched, and kept itself alight miraculously. With so little of her
essential character and ritual changed, it is small wonder that the
half-pagan, half-Christian Irish gladly accepted the new saint in the
stead of the old goddess.

Doubtless a careful examination of Irish hagiology would result in the
discovery of many other saints whose names and attributes might render
them suspect of previous careers as pagan gods. But their acceptation
was not sufficiently general to do away with the need of other means of
counteracting the still living influence of the Gaelic Pantheon.
Therefore a fresh school of euhemerists arose to prove that the gods
were never even saints, but merely worldly men who had once lived and
ruled in Erin. Learned monks worked hard to construct a history of
Ireland from the Flood downwards. Mr. Eugene O'Curry has compiled from
the various pedigrees they elaborated, and inserted into the books of
Ballymote, Lecan, and Leinster an amazing genealogy which shows how, not
merely the Tuatha D Danann, but also the Fir Bolgs, the Fomors, the
Milesians, and the races of Partholon and Nemed were descended from
Noah. Japhet, the patriarch's son, was the father of Magog, from whom
came two lines, the first being the Milesians, while the second branched
out into all the other races.[263]

Having once worked the gods, first into universal history, and then into
the history of Ireland, it was an easy matter to supply them with dates
of birth and death, local habitations, and places of burial. We are told
with precision exactly how long Nuada, the Dagda, Lugh, and the others
reigned at Tara. The barrows by the Boyne provided them with comfortable
tombs. Their enemies, the Fomors, became real invaders who were beaten
in real battles. Thus it was thought to make plain prose of their
divinities.

It is only fair, however, to these early euhemerists to say that they
have their modern disciples. There are many writers, of recognized
authority upon their subjects, who, in dealing with the history of
Ireland or the composition of the British race, claim to find real
peoples in the tribes mentioned in Gaelic myth. Unfortunately, the only
point they agree upon is the accepted one-that the "Milesians" were
Aryan Celts. They are divided upon the question of the "Fir Bolgs", in
whom some see the pre-Aryan tribes, while others, led astray by the
name, regard them as Belgic Gauls; and over the really mythological
races they run wild. In the Tuatha D Danann are variously found Gaels,
Picts, Danes, Scandinavians, Ligurians, and Finns, while the Fomors rest
under the suspicion of having been Iberians, Moors, Romans, Finns,
Goths, or Teutons. As for the people of Partholon and Nemed, they have
even been explained as men of the Palolithic Age. This chaos of opinion
was fortunately avoided by the native annalists, who had no particular
views upon the question of race, except that everybody came from
"Spain".

Of course there were dissenters from this prevailing mania for
euhemerization. As late as the tenth century, a poet called Eochaid
O'Flynn, writing of the Tuatha D Danann, at first seems to hesitate
whether to ascribe humanity or divinity to them, and at last frankly
avows their godhead. In his poem, preserved in the Book of
Ballymote,[264] he says:-

        "Though they came to learned Erinn
         Without buoyant, adventurous ships,
         No man in creation knew
         Whether they were of the earth or of the sky.

        "If they were diabolical demons,
         They came from that woeful expulsion;[265]
         If they were of a race of tribes and nations,
         If they were human, they were of the race of Beothach."

Then he enumerates them in due succession, and ends by declaring:-

        "Though I have treated of these deities in their order,
         Yet I have not adored them".

One may surmise with probability that the common people agreed rather
with the poet than with the monk. Pious men in monasteries might write
what they liked, but mere laymen would not be easily persuaded that
their cherished gods had never been anything more than men like
themselves. Probably they said little, but acted in secret according to
their inherited ideas. Let it be granted, for the sake of peace, that
Goibniu was only a man; none the less, his name was known to be
uncommonly effective in an incantation. This applied equally to
Diancecht, and invocations to both of them are contained in some verses
which an eighth-century Irish monk wrote on the margin of a manuscript
still preserved at St. Gall, in Switzerland. Some prescriptions of
Diancecht's have come down to us, but it must be admitted that they
hardly differ from those current among ordinary medival physicians.
Perhaps, after that unfortunate spilling of the herbs that grew out of
Miach's body, he had to fall back upon empirical research. He invented a
porridge for "the relief of ailments of the body, as cold, phlegm,
throat cats, and the presence of living things in the body, as worms";
it was compounded of hazel buds, dandelion, chickweed, sorrel, and
oatmeal; and was to be taken every morning and evening. He also
prescribed against the effects of witchcraft and the fourteen diseases
of the stomach.

Goibniu, in addition to his original character as the divine smith and
sorcerer, gained a third reputation among the Irish as a great builder
and bridge-maker. As such he is known as the Gobhan Saer, that is,
Goibniu the Architect, and marvellous tales, current all over Ireland
attest his prowess.

           "Men call'd him Gobhan Saer, and many a tale
              Yet lingers in the by-ways of the land
            Of how he cleft the rock, or down the vale
              Led the bright river, child-like, in his hand:
            Of how on giant ships he spread great sail,
              And many marvels else by him first plann'd",

writes a poet of modern Ireland.[266] Especially were the "round towers"
attributed to him, and the Christian clerics appropriated his popularity
by describing him as having been the designer of their churches. He
used, according to legend, to wander over the country, clad, like the
Greek Hephaestus, whom he resembles, in working dress, seeking
commissions and adventures. His works remain in the cathedrals and
churches of Ireland; and, with regard to his adventures, many strange
legends are still, or were until very recently, current upon the lips of
old people in remote parts of Ireland.

Some of these are, as might have been expected, nothing more than
half-understood recollections of the ancient mythology. In them appear
as characters others of the old, yet not quite forgotten gods-Lugh,
Manannn, and Balor-names still remembered as those of long-past druids,
heroes, and kings of Ireland in the misty olden time.

One or two of them are worth re-telling. Mr. William Larminie,
collecting folk-tales in Achill Island, took one from the lips of an
aged peasant, which tells in its confused way what might almost be
called the central incident of Gaelic mythology, the mysterious birth of
the sun-god from demoniac parentage, and his eventual slaying of his
grandfather when he came to full age.[267]

Gobhan the Architect and his son, young Gobhan, runs the tale, were sent
for by Balor of the Blows to build him a palace. They built it so well
that Balor decided never to let them leave his kingdom alive, for fear
they should build another one equally good for someone else. He
therefore had all the scaffolding removed from round the palace while
they were still on the top, with the intention of leaving them up there
to die of hunger. But, when they discovered this, they began to destroy
the roof, so that Balor was obliged to let them come down.

He, none the less, refused to allow them to return to Ireland. The
crafty Gobhan, however, had his plan ready. He told Balor that the
injury that had been done to the palace roof could not be repaired
without special tools, which he had left behind him at home. Balor
declined to let either old Gobhan or young Gobhan go back to fetch them;
but he offered to send his own son. Gobhan gave Balor's son directions
for the journey. He was to travel until he came to a house with a stack
of corn at the door. Entering it, he would find a woman with one hand
and a child with one eye.

Balor's son found the house, and asked the woman for the tools. She
expected him; for it had been arranged between Gobhan and his wife what
should be done, if Balor refused to let him return. She took Balor's son
to a huge chest, and told him that the tools were at the bottom of it,
so far down that she could not reach them, and that he must get into the
chest, and pick them up himself. But, as soon as he was safely inside,
she shut the lid on him, telling him that he would have to stay there
until his father allowed old Gobhan and young Gobhan to come home with
their pay. And she sent the same message to Balor himself.

There was an exchange of prisoners, Balor giving the two Gobhans their
pay and a ship to take them home, and Gobhan's wife releasing Balor's
son. But, before the two builders went, Balor asked them whom he should
now employ to repair his palace. Old Gobhan told him that, next to
himself, there was no workman in Ireland better than one Gavidjeen Go.

When Gobhan got back to Ireland, he sent Gavidjeen Go to Balor. But he
gave him a piece of advice-to accept as pay only one thing: Balor's gray
cow, which would fill twenty barrels at one milking. Balor agreed to
this, but, when he gave the cow to Gavidjeen Go to take back with him to
Ireland, he omitted to include her byre-rope, which was the only thing
that would keep her from returning to her original owner.

The gray cow gave so much trouble to Gavidjeen Go by her straying, that
he was obliged to hire military champions to watch her during the day
and bring her safely home at night. The bargain made was that Gavidjeen
Go should forge the champion a sword for his pay, but that, if he lost
the cow, his life was to be forfeited.

At last, a certain warrior called Cian was unlucky enough to let the cow
escape. He followed her tracks down to the sea-shore and right to the
edge of the waves, and there he lost them altogether. He was tearing his
hair in his perplexity, when he saw a man rowing a coracle. The man, who
was no other than Manannn son of Lr, came in close to the shore, and
asked what was the matter.

Cian told him.

"What would you give to anyone who would take you to the place where the
gray cow is?" asked Manannn.

"I have nothing to give," replied Cian.

"All I ask," said Manannn, "is half of whatever you gain before you
come back."

Cian agreed to that willingly enough, and Manannn told him to get into
the coracle. In the wink of an eye, he had landed him in Balor's
kingdom, the realm of the cold, where they roast no meat, but eat their
food raw. Cian was not used to this diet, so he lit himself a fire, and
began to cook some food. Balor saw the fire, and came down to it, and he
was so pleased that he appointed Cian to be his fire-maker and cook.

Now Balor had a daughter, of whom a druid had prophesied that she would,
some day, bear a son who would kill his grandfather. Therefore, like
Acrisius, in Greek legend, he shut her up in a tower, guarded by women,
and allowed her to see no man but himself. One day, Cian saw Balor go to
the tower. He waited until he had come back, and then went to explore.
He had the gift of opening locked doors and shutting them again after
him. When he got inside, he lit a fire, and this novelty so delighted
Balor's daughter that she invited him to visit her again. After this-in
the Achill islander's quaint phrase-"he was ever coming there, until a
child happened to her." Balor's daughter gave the baby to Cian to take
away. She also gave him the byre-rope which belonged to the gray cow.

Cian was in great danger now, for Balor had found out about the child.
He led the gray cow away with the rope to the sea-shore, and waited for
Manannn. The Son of Lr had told Cian that, when he was in any
difficulty, he was to think of him, and he would at once appear. Cian
thought of him now, and, in a moment, Manannn appeared with his
coracle. Cian got into the boat, with the baby and the gray cow, just as
Balor, in hot pursuit, came down to the beach.

Balor, by his incantations, raised a great storm to drown them; but
Manannn, whose druidism was greater, stilled it. Then Balor turned the
sea into fire, to burn them; but Manannn put it out with a stone.

When they were safe back in Ireland, Manannn asked Cian for his
promised reward.

"I have gained nothing but the boy, and I cannot cut him in two, so I
will give him to you whole," he replied.

"That is what I was wanting all the time," said Manannn; "when he grows
up, there will be no champion equal to him."

So Manannn baptized the boy, calling him "the Dul-Dauna". This name,
meaning "Blind-Stubborn", is certainly a curious corruption of the
original _Ioldanach_[268] "Master of all Knowledge". When the boy had
grown up, he went one day to the sea-shore. A ship came past, in which
was a man. The traditions of Donnybrook Fair are evidently prehistoric,
for the boy, without troubling to ask who the stranger was, took a dart
"out of his pocket", hurled it, and hit him. The man in the boat
happened to be Balor. Thus, in accordance with the prophecy, he was
slain by his grandson, who, though the folktale does not name him, was
obviously Lugh.

Another version of the same legend, collected by the Irish scholar
O'Donovan on the coast of Donegal, opposite Balor s favourite haunt,
Tory Island, is interesting as completing the one just narrated.[269] In
this folk-tale, Goibniu is called Gavida, and is made one of three
brothers, the other two being called Mac Kineely and Mac Samthainn. They
were chiefs of Donegal, smiths and farmers, while Balor was a robber who
harassed the mainland from his stronghold on Tory Island. The gray cow
belonged to Mac Kineely, and Balor stole it. Its owner determined to be
revenged, and, knowing the prediction concerning Balor's death at the
hands of an as yet unborn grandson, he persuaded a kindly fairy to
spirit him in female disguise to Tor Mor, where Balor's daughter, who
was called Ethnea, was kept imprisoned. The result of this expedition
was not merely the one son necessary to fulfil the prophecy, but three.
This apparent superfluity was fortunate; for Balor drowned two of them,
the other being picked out of the sea by the same fairy who had been
incidentally responsible for his birth, and handed over to his father,
Mac Kineely, to be brought up. Shortly after this, Balor managed to
capture Mac Kineely, and, in retaliation for the wrong done him, chopped
off his head upon a large white stone, still known locally as the "Stone
of Kineely". Satisfied with this, and quite unaware that one of his
daughter's children had been saved from death, and was now being brought
up as a smith by Gavida, Balor went on with his career of robbery,
varying it by visits to the forge to purchase arms. One day, being there
during Gavida's absence, he began boasting to the young assistant of how
he had compassed Mac Kineely's death. He never finished the story, for
Lugh-which was the boy's name-snatched a red-hot iron from the fire, and
thrust it into Balor's eye, and through his head.

Thus, in these two folk-tales,[270] gathered in different parts of
Ireland, at different times, by different persons, survives quite a mass
of mythological detail only to be found otherwise in ancient manuscripts
containing still more ancient matter. Crystallized in them may be found
the names of six members of the old Gaelic Pantheon, each filling the
same part as of old. Goibniu has not lost his mastery of smithcraft;
Balor is still the Fomorian king of the cold regions of the sea; his
daughter Ethniu becomes, by Cian, the mother of the sun-god; Lugh, who
still bears his old title of _Ioldanach_, though it is strangely
corrupted into a name meaning almost the exact opposite, is still
fostered by Manannn, Son of the Sea, and in the end grows up to destroy
his grandfather by a blow in the one vulnerable place, his death-dealing
eye. Perhaps, too, we may claim to see a genuine, though jumbled
tradition, in the Fomor-like deformities of Gobhan's wife and child, and
in the story of the gray cow and her byre-rope, which recalls that of
the Dagda's black-maned heifer, Ocean.

The memories of the peasantry still hold many stories of Lugh, as well
as of Angus, and others of the old gods. But, next to the Gobhan Saer,
the one whose fame is still greatest is that ever-potent and
ever-popular figure, the great Manannn.

The last, perhaps, to receive open adoration, he is represented by
kindly tradition as having been still content to help and watch over the
people who had rejected and ceased to worship him. Up to the time of St.
Columba, he was the special guardian of Irishmen in foreign parts,
assisting them in their dangers and bringing them home safe. For the
peasantry, too, he caused favourable weather and good crops. His fairy
subjects tilled the ground while men slept. But this is said to have
come to an end at last. Saint Columba, having broken his golden chalice,
gave it to a servant to get repaired. On his way, the servant was met by
a stranger, who asked him where he was going. The man told him, and
showed him the chalice. The stranger breathed upon it, and, at once, the
broken parts reunited. Then he begged him to return to his master, give
him the chalice, and tell him that Manannn son of Lr, who had mended
it, desired to know in very truth whether he would ever attain paradise.
"Alas," said the ungrateful saint, "there is no forgiveness for a man
who does such works as this!" The servant went back with the answer, and
Manannn, when he heard it, broke out into indignant lament. "Woe is me,
Manannn mac Lr! for years I've helped the Catholics of Ireland, but
I'll do it no more, till they're as weak as water. I'll go to the gray
waves in the Highlands of Scotland."[271]

And there he remained. For, unless the charming stories of Miss Fiona
Macleod are mere beautiful imaginings and nothing more, he is not
unknown even to-day among the solitary shepherds and fishers of "the
farthest Hebrides". In the _Contemporary Review_ for October, 1902,[272]
she tells how an old man of fourscore years would often be visited in
his shieling by a tall, beautiful stranger, with a crest on his head,
"like white canna blowing in the wind, but with a blueness in it", and
"a bright, cold, curling flame under the soles of his feet". The man
told him many things, and prophesied to him the time of his death.
Generally, the stranger's hands were hidden in the folds of the white
cloak he wore, but, once, he moved to touch the shepherd, who saw then
that his flesh was like water, with sea-weed floating among the bones.
So that Murdo MacIan knew that he could be speaking with none other than
the Son of the Sea.

Nor is he yet quite forgotten in his own Island of Man, of which local
tradition says he was the first inhabitant. He is also described as its
king, who kept it from invasion by his magic. He would cause mists to
rise at any moment and conceal the island, and by the same glamour he
could make one man seem like a hundred, and little chips of wood which
he threw into the water to appear like ships of war. It is no wonder
that he held his kingdom against all-comers, until his sway was ended,
like that of the other Gaelic gods, by the arrival of Saint Patrick.
After this, he seems to have declined into a traditionary giant who used
to leap from Peel Castle to Contrary Head for exercise, or hurl huge
rocks, upon which the mark of his hand can still be seen. It is said
that he took no tribute from his subjects, or worshippers except bundles
of green rushes, which were placed every Midsummer Eve upon two mountain
peaks, one called Warrefield in olden days, but now South Barrule, and
the other called Man, and not now to be identified. His grave, which is
thirty yards long, is pointed out, close to Peel Castle. The most
curious legend connected with him, however, tells us that he had three
legs, on which he used to travel at a great pace. How this was done may
be seen from the arms of the island, on which are pictured his three
limbs, joined together, and spread out like the spokes of a wheel.[273]

An Irish tradition tells us that, when Manannn left Ireland for
Scotland, the vacant kingship of the gods or fairies was taken by one
Mac Moineanta, to the great grief of those who had known Manannn.[274]
Perhaps this great grief led to Mac Moineanta's being deposed, for the
present king of the Irish fairies is Finvarra, the same Fionnbharr to
whom the Dagda allotted the _sdh_ of Meadha after the conquest of the
Tuatha D Danann by the Milesians, and who takes a prominent part in the
Fenian stories. So great is the persistence of tradition in Ireland that
this hill of Meadha, now spelt Knockma, is still considered to be the
abode of him and his queen, Onagh. Numberless stories are told about
Finvarra, including, of course, that very favourite Celtic tale of the
stolen bride, and her recapture from the fairies by the siege and
digging up of the _sdh_ in which she was held prisoner. Finvarra, like
Mider of Bri Leith, carried away a human Etain-the wife, not of a high
king, but of an Irish lord. The modern Eochaid Airem, having heard an
invisible voice tell him where he was to look for his lost bride,
gathered all his workmen and labourers and proceeded to demolish
Knockma. Every day they almost dug it up, but every night the breach was
found to have been repaired by fairy workmen of Finvarra's. This went on
for three days, when the Irish lord thought of the well-known device of
sanctifying the work of excavation by sprinkling the turned-up earth
with salt. Needless to say, it succeeded. Finvarra gave back the bride,
still in the trance into which he had thrown her; and the deep cut into
the fairy hill still remains to furnish proof to the incredulous.[275]

Finvarra does not always appear, however, in such unfriendly guise. He
was popularly reputed to have under his special care the family of the
Kirwans of Castle Hacket, on the northern slope of Knockma. Owing to his
benevolent influence, the castle cellars never went dry, nor did the
quality of the wine deteriorate. Besides the wine-cellar, Finvarra
looked after the stables, and it was owing to the exercise that he and
his fairy followers gave the horses by night that Mr. John Kirwan's
racers were so often successful on the Curragh. That such stories could
have passed current as fact, which they undoubtedly did, is excellent
proof of how late and how completely a mythology may survive among the
uncultured.[276]

Finvarra rules to-day over a wide realm of fairy folk. Many of these,
again, have their own vassal chieftains, forming a tribal hierarchy such
as must have existed in the Celtic days of Ireland. Finvarra and Onagh
are high king and queen, but, under them, Cliodna[277] is tributary
queen of Munster, and rules from a _sdh_ near Mallow in County Cork,
while, under her again, are Aoibhinn[278], queen of the fairies of North
Munster, and Ain, queen of the fairies of South Munster. These names
form but a single instance. A map of fairy Ireland could without much
difficulty be drawn, showing, with almost political exactness, the
various kingdoms of the Sdhe.

Far less easy, however, would be the task of ascertaining the origin and
lineage of these fabled beings. Some of them can still be traced as
older gods and goddesses. In the eastern parts of Ireland, Badb and her
sisters have become "banshees" who wail over deaths not necessarily
found in battle. Aynia, deemed the most powerful fairy in Ulster, and
Ain, queen of South Munster, are perhaps the same person, the
mysterious and awful goddess once adored as Anu, or Danu. Of the two, it
is Ain who especially seems to carry on the traditions of the older
Anu, worshipped, according to the "Choice of Names", in Munster as a
goddess of prosperity and abundance. Within living memory, she was
propitiated by a magical ritual upon every Saint John's Eve, to ensure
fertility during the coming year. The villagers round her _sdh_ of Cnoc
Ain (Knockainy) carried burning bunches of hay or straw upon poles to
the top of the hill, and thence dispersed among the fields, waving these
torches over the crops and cattle. This fairy, or goddess was held to be
friendly, and, indeed, more than friendly, to men. Whether or not she
were the mother of the gods, she is claimed as first ancestress by half
a dozen famous Irish families.

Among her children was the famous Earl Gerald, offspring of her alliance
with the fourth Earl of Desmond, known as "The Magician". As in the
well-known story of the Swan-maidens, the magician-earl is said to have
stolen Ain's cloak while she was bathing, and refused to return it
unless she became his bride. But, in the end, he lost her. Ain had
warned her husband never to show surprise at anything done by their son;
but a wonderful feat which he performed made the earl break this
condition, and Ain was obliged, by fairy law, to leave him. But, though
she had lost her husband, she was not separated from her son, who was
received into the fairy world after his death, and now lives under the
surface of Lough Gur, in County Limerick, waiting, like the British
Arthur, for the hour to strike in which he shall lead forth his warriors
to drive the foreigners from Ireland. But this will not be until, by
riding round the lake once in every seventh year, he shall have worn his
horse's silver shoes as thin as a cat's ear.[279]

Not only the tribe of Danu, but heroes of the other mythical cycles
swell the fairy host to-day. Donn, son of Mil, who was drowned before
ever he set foot on Irish soil, lives at "Donn's House", a line of
sand-hills in the Dingle Peninsula of Kerry, and, as late as the
eighteenth century, we find him invoked by a local poet, half in jest,
no doubt, but still, perhaps also a little in earnest.[280] The heroes
of Ulster have no part in fairyland; but their enemy, Medb, is credited
with queenly rule among the Sdhe, and is held by some to have been the
original of "Queen Mab". Caoilt, last of the Fenians, was, in spite of
his leanings towards Christianity, enrolled among the Tuatha D Danann,
but none of his kin are known there, neither Ossian, nor Oscar, nor even
Finn himself. Yet not even to merely historical mortals are the gates of
the gods necessarily closed. The Barry, chief of the barony of
Barrymore, is said to inhabit an enchanted palace in Knockthierna, one
of the Nagles Hills. The not less traditionally famous O'Donaghue, whose
domain was near Killarney, now dwells beneath the waters of that lake,
and may still be seen, it is said, upon May Day.[281]

But besides these figures, which can be traced in mythology or history,
and others who, though all written record of them has perished, are
obviously of the same character, there are numerous beings who suggest a
different origin from that of the Aryan-seeming fairies. They correspond
to the elves and trolls of Scandinavian, or the silenoi and satyrs of
Greek myth. Such is the Leprechaun, who makes shoes for the fairies, and
knows where hidden treasures are; the Gan Ceanach, or "love-talker", who
fills the ears of idle girls with pleasant fancies when, to merely
mortal ideas, they should be busy with their work; the Pooka, who leads
travellers astray, or, taking the shape of an ass or mule, beguiles them
to mount upon his back to their discomfiture; the Dulachan, who rides
without a head; and other friendly or malicious sprites. Whence come
they? A possible answer suggests itself. Preceding the Aryans, and
surviving the Aryan conquest all over Europe, was a large non-Aryan
population, which must have had its own gods, who would retain their
worship, be revered by successive generations, and remain rooted to the
soil. May not these uncouth and half-developed Irish Leprechauns,
Pookas, and Dulachans, together with the Scotch Cluricanes, Brownies,
and their kin, be no "creations of popular fancy", but the dwindling
figures of those darker gods of "the dark Iberians"?

-----

Footnote 260:

  The story, contained in the Book of the Dun Cow, is called _The
  Phantom Chariot_. It has been translated by Mr. O'Beirne Crowe, and is
  included in Miss Hull's _Cuchulinn Saga_.

Footnote 261:

  See Elton, _Origins of English History_, pp. 269-271.

Footnote 262:

  Caius Julius Solinus, known as Polyhistor, chap. XXIV.

Footnote 263:

  It is appended to his translation of the tale of the _Exile of the
  Children of Usnach_ in _Atlantis_, Vol. III.

Footnote 264:

  See Cusack's _History of Ireland_, pp. 160-162.

Footnote 265:

  _I.e._ from Heaven.

Footnote 266:

  Thomas D'Arcy MGee: _Poems_, p. 78, "The Gobhan Saer".

Footnote 267:

  Larminie: _West Irish Folk-Tales_, pp. 1-9.

Footnote 268:

  Pronounced _Ildna_.

Footnote 269:

  It is told in Rhys's _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 314-317.

Footnote 270:

  For still other folk-tale versions of this same myth see Curtin's
  _Hero Tales of Ireland_.

Footnote 271:

  A Donegal story, collected by Mr. David Fitzgerald and published in
  the _Revue Celtique_, Vol. IV, p. 177.

Footnote 272:

  The paper is called "Sea-Magic and Running Water".

Footnote 273:

  Moore: _Folklore of the Isle of Man_.

Footnote 274:

  See an article in the _Dublin University Magazine_ for June, 1864

Footnote 275:

  The story is among those told by Lady Wilde in her _Ancient Legends of
  Ireland_, Vol. I, pp. 77-82.

Footnote 276:

  _Dublin University Magazine_, June, 1864.

Footnote 277:

  Pronounced _Cleena_.

Footnote 278:

  Pronounced _Evin_.

Footnote 279:

  See Fitzgerald, _Popular Tales of Ireland_, in Vol. IV of the _Revue
  Celtique_.

Footnote 280:

  _Dublin University Magazine_, June, 1864.

Footnote 281:

  For stories of these two Norman-Irish heroes, see Crofton Croker's
  _Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       THE BRITISH GODS AND THEIR
                                STORIES

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XVI

                        THE GODS OF THE BRITONS


The descriptions and the stories of the British gods have hardly come
down to us in so ample or so compact a form as those of the deities of
the Gaels, as they are preserved in the Irish and Scottish manuscripts.
They have also suffered far more from the sophistications of the
euhemerist. Only in the "Four Branches of the Mabinogi" do the gods of
the Britons appear in anything like their real character of supernatural
beings, masters of magic, and untrammelled by the limitations which
hedge in mortals. Apart from those four fragments of mythology, and from
a very few scattered references in the early Welsh poems, one must
search for them under strange disguises. Some masquerade as kings in
Geoffrey of Monmouth's more than apocryphal _Historia Britonum_. Others
have received an undeserved canonization, which must be stripped from
them before they can be seen in their true colours. Others, again, were
adopted by the Norman-French romancers, and turned into the champions of
chivalry now known as Arthur's Knights of the Round Table. But, however
disguised, their real nature can still be discerned. The Gaels and the
Britons were but two branches of one race-the Celtic. In many of the
gods of the Britons we shall recognize, with names alike and attributes
the same, the familiar features of the Gaelic Tuatha D Danann.

The British gods are sometimes described as divided into three
families-the "Children of Dn", the "Children of Nudd", and the
"Children of Llyr". But these three families are really only two; for
Nudd, or Lludd, as he is variously called, is himself described as a son
of Beli, who was the husband of the goddess Dn. There can be no doubt
that Dn herself is the same divine personage as Danu, the mother of the
Tuatha D Danann, and that Beli is the British equivalent of the Gaelic
Bil, the universal Dis Pater who sent out the first Gaels from Hades to
take possession of Ireland. With the other family, the "Children of
Llyr", we are equally on familiar ground; for the British Llyr can be
none other than the Gaelic sea-god Lr. These two families or tribes are
usually regarded as in opposition, and their struggles seem to symbolize
in British myth that same conflict between the powers of heaven, light,
and life and of the sea, darkness, and death which are shadowed in
Gaelic mythology in the battles between the Tuatha D Danann and the
Fomors.

For the children of Dn were certainly gods of the sky. Their names are
writ large in heaven. The glittering W which we call "Cassiopeia's
Chair" was to our British ancestors _Llys Dn_, or "Dn's Court"; our
"Northern Crown" was _Caer Arianrod_, the "Castle of Arianrod", Dn's
daughter; while the "Milky Way" was the "Castle of Gwydion", Dn's
son.[282] More than this, the greatest of her children, the Nudd or
Lludd whom some make the head of a dynasty of his own, was the Zeus
alike of the Britons and of the Gaels. His epithet of _Llaw Ereint_,
that is, "of the Hand of Silver", proves him the same personage as Nuada
the "Silver-Handed". The legend which must have existed to explain this
peculiarity has been lost on British ground, but it was doubtless the
same as that told of the Irish god. With it, and, no doubt, much else,
has disappeared any direct account of battles fought by him as sky-god
against Fomor-like enemies. But, under the faint disguise of a king of
Britain, an ancient Welsh tale[283] records how he put an end to three
supernatural "plagues" which oppressed his country. In addition to this,
we find him under his name of Nudd described in a Welsh Triad as one of
"the three generous heroes of the Isle of Britain", while another makes
him the owner of twenty-one thousand milch cows-an expression which
must, to the primitive mind, have implied inexhaustible wealth. Both
help us to the conception of a god of heaven and battle, triumphant, and
therefore rich and liberal.[284]

More tangible evidence is, however, not lacking to prove the wide-spread
nature of his worship. A temple dedicated to him in Roman times under
the name of Nodens, or Nudens, has been discovered at Lydney, on the
banks of the Severn. The god is pictured on a plaque of bronze as a
youthful deity, haloed like the sun, and driving a four-horsed chariot.
Flying spirits, typifying the winds, accompany him; while his power over
the sea is symbolized by attendant Tritons.[285] This was in the west of
Britain, while, in the east, there is good reason to believe that he had
a shrine overlooking the Thames. Tradition declares that St. Paul's
Cathedral occupies the site of an ancient pagan temple; while the spot
on which it stands was called, we know from Geoffrey of Monmouth, "Parth
Lludd" by the Britons, and "Ludes Geat" by the Saxons.[286]

Great, however, as he probably was, Lludd, or Nudd occupies less space
in Welsh story, as we have it now, than his son. Gwyn ap Nudd has
outlived in tradition almost all his supernatural kin. Professor Rhys is
tempted to see in him the British equivalent of the Gaelic Finn mac
Cumhail.[287] The name of both alike means "white"; both are sons of the
heaven-god; both are famed as hunters. Gwyn, however, is more than that;
for his game is man. In the early Welsh poems, he is a god of battle and
of the dead, and, as such, fills the part of a _psychopompos_,
conducting the slain into Hades, and there ruling over them. In later,
semi-Christianized story he is described as "Gwyn, son of Nudd, whom God
has placed over the brood of devils in Annwn, lest they should destroy
the present race[288]". Later again, as paganism still further
degenerated, he came to be considered as king of the _Tylwyth Teg_, the
Welsh fairies,[289] and his name as such has hardly yet died out of his
last haunt, the romantic vale of Neath. He is the wild huntsman of Wales
and the West of England, and it is his pack which is sometimes heard at
chase in waste places by night.

In his earliest guise, as a god of war and death, he is the subject of a
poem in dialogue contained in the Black Book of Caermarthen.[290]
Obscure, like most of the ancient Welsh poems,[291] it is yet a spirited
production, and may be quoted here as a favourable specimen of the
poetry of the early Cymri. In it we shall see mirrored perhaps the
clearest figure of the British Pantheon, the "mighty hunter", not of
deer, but of men's souls, riding his demon horse, and cheering on his
demon hound to the fearful chase. He knows when and where all the great
warriors fell, for he gathered their souls upon the field of battle, and
now rules over them in Hades, or upon some "misty mountain-top".[292] It
describes a mythical prince, named Gwyddneu Garanhir, known to Welsh
legend as the ruler of a lost country now covered by the waters of
Cardigan Bay, asking protection of the god, who accords it, and then
relates the story of his exploits:

                    _Gwyddneu._

    A bull of conflict was he, active in dispersing an arrayed army,
    The ruler of hosts, indisposed to anger,
    Blameless and pure his conduct in protecting life.

                      _Gwyn._

    Against a hero stout was his advance,
    The ruler of hosts, disposer of wrath,
    There will be protection for thee since thou askest it.

                    _Gwyddneu._

    For thou hast given me protection
    How warmly wert thou welcomed!
    The hero of hosts, from what region thou comest?

                      _Gwyn._

    I come from battle and conflict
    With a shield in my hand;
    Broken is the helmet by the pushing of spears.

                    _Gwyddneu._

    I will address thee, exalted man,
    With his shield in distress.
    Brave man, what is thy descent?

                      _Gwyn._

    Round-hoofed is my horse, the torment of battle,
    Fairy am I called, Gwyn the son of Nudd,[293]
    The lover of Creurdilad, the daughter of Lludd.

                    _Gwyddneu._

    Since it is thou, Gwyn, an upright man,
    From thee there is no concealing:
    I am Gwyddneu Garanhir.

                      _Gwyn._

    Hasten to my ridge, the Taw abode;
    Not the nearest Taw name I to thee,
    But that Taw which is the farthest.[294]

    Polished is my ring, golden my saddle and bright:
    To my sadness
    I saw a conflict before Caer Vandwy.[295]

    Before Caer Vandwy a host I saw,
    Shields were shattered and ribs broken;
    Renowned and splendid was he who made the assault.

                    _Gwyddneu._

    Gwyn, son of Nudd, the hope of armies,
    Quicker would legions fall before the hoofs
    Of thy horse than broken rushes to the ground.

                      _Gwyn._

    Handsome my dog, and round-bodied,
    And truly the best of dogs;
    Dormarth[296] was he, which belonged to Maelgwyn.

                    _Gwyddneu._

    Dormarth with the ruddy nose! what a gazer
    Thou art upon me because I notice
    Thy wanderings on Gwibir Vynyd.[297]

                      _Gwyn._

    I have been in the place where was killed Gwendoleu,
    The son of Ceidaw, the pillar of songs,
    When the ravens screamed over blood.

    I have been in the place where Brn was killed,
    The son of Iweridd, of far extending fame,
    When the ravens of the battle-field screamed.

    I have been where Llacheu was slain,
    The son of Arthur, extolled in songs,
    When the ravens screamed over blood.

    I have been where Meurig was killed,
    The son of Carreian, of honourable fame,
    When the ravens screamed over flesh.

    I have been where Gwallawg was killed,
    The son of Goholeth, the accomplished,
    The resister of Lloegyr, the son of Lleynawg.

    I have been where the soldiers of Britain were slain,
    From the east to the north:
    I am the escort of the grave.[298]

    I have been where the soldiers of Britain were slain,
    From the east to the south:
    I am alive, they in death!

A line in this poem allows us to see Gwyn in another and less sinister
rle. "The lover of Creurdilad, the daughter of Lludd," he calls
himself; and an episode in the mythical romance of "Kulhwch and Olwen",
preserved in the Red Book of Hergest, gives the details of his
courtship. Gwyn had as rival a deity called Gwyrthur ap Greidawl, that
is "Victor, son of Scorcher".[299] These two waged perpetual war for
Creurdilad, or Creudylad, each in turn stealing her from the other,
until the matter was referred to Arthur, who decided that Creudylad
should be sent back to her father, and that Gwyn and Gwyrthur "should
fight for her every first of May, from henceforth until the day of doom,
and that whichever of them should then be conqueror should have the
maiden". What satisfaction this would be to the survivor of what might
be somewhat flippantly described as, in two senses, the longest
engagement on record, is not very clear; but its mythological
interpretation appears fairly obvious. In Gwyn, god of death and the
underworld, and in the solar deity, Gwyrthur, we may see the powers of
darkness and sunshine, of winter and summer, in contest,[300] each
alternately winning and losing a bride who would seem to represent the
spring with its grain and flowers. Creudylad, whom the story of "Kulhwch
and Olwen" calls "the most splendid maiden in the three islands of the
mighty and in the three islands adjacent", is, in fact, the British
Persephon. As the daughter of Lludd, she is child of the shining sky.
But a different tradition must have made her a daughter of Llyr, the
sea-god; for her name as such passed, through Geoffrey of Monmouth, to
Shakespeare, in whose hands she became that pathetic figure, Cordelia in
"King Lear". It may not be altogether unworthy of notice, though perhaps
it is only a coincidence, that in some myths the Greek Persephon is
made a daughter of Zeus and in others of Poseidon.[301]

Turning from the sky-god and his son, we find others of Dn's children
to have been the exponents of those arts of life which early races held
to have been taught directly by the gods to men. Dn herself had a
brother, Mth, son of a mysterious Mthonwy, and recognizable as a
benevolent ruler of the underworld akin to Beli, or perhaps that god
himself under another title, for the name Mth, which means "coin,
money, treasure",[302] recalls that of Plouton, the Greek god of Hades,
in his guise of possessor and giver of metals. It was a belief common to
the Aryan races that wisdom, as well as wealth, came originally from the
underworld; and we find Mth represented, in the Mabinogi bearing his
name, as handing on his magical lore to his nephew and pupil Gwydion,
who, there is good reason to believe, was the same divine personage whom
the Teutonic tribes worshipped as "Woden" and "Odin". Thus equipped,
Gwydion son of Dn became the druid of the gods, the "master of illusion
and phantasy", and, not only that, but the teacher of all that is useful
and good, the friend and helper of mankind, and the perpetual fighter
against niggardly underworld powers for the good gifts which they
refused to allow out of their keeping. Shoulder to shoulder with him in
this "holy war" of culture against ignorance, and light against
darkness, stood his brothers Amaethon, god of agriculture, and Govannan,
a god of smithcraft identical with the Gaelic Giobniu. He had also a
sister called Arianrod, or "Silver Circle", who, as is common in
mythologies, was not only his sister, but also his wife. So Zeus wedded
Her; and, indeed, it is difficult to say where otherwise the partners
of gods are to come from. Of this connection two sons were born at one
birth-Dylan and Lleu, who are considered as representing the twin powers
of darkness and light. With darkness the sea was inseparably connected
by the Celts, and, as soon as the dark twin was born and named, he
plunged headlong into his native element. "And immediately when he was
in the sea," says the Mabinogi of Mth, son of Mthonwy, "he took its
nature, and swam as well as the best fish that was therein. And for that
reason was he called Dylan, the Son of the Wave. Beneath him no wave
ever broke." He was killed with a spear at last by his uncle, Govannan,
and, according to the bard Taliesin, the waves of Britain, Ireland,
Scotland, and the Isle of Man wept for him.[303] Beautiful legends grew
up around his death. The clamour of the waves dashing upon the beach is
the expression of their longing to avenge their son. The sound of the
sea rushing up the mouth of the River Conway is still known as "Dylan's
death-groan"[304]. A small promontory on the Carnarvonshire side of the
Menai Straits, called _Pwynt Maen Tylen_, or _Pwynt Maen Dulan_,
preserves his name.[305]

The other child of Gwydion and Arianrod grew up to become the British
sun-god, Lleu Llaw Gyffes, the exact counterpart of the Gaelic Lugh
Lamhfada, "Light the Long-handed". Like all solar deities, his growth
was rapid. When he was a year old, he seemed to be two years; at the age
of two, he travelled by himself; and when he was four years old, he was
as tall as a boy of eight, and was his father's constant companion.

One day, Gwydion took him to the castle of Arianrod-not her castle in
the sky, but her abode on earth, the still-remembered site of which is
marked by a patch of rocks in the Menai Straits, accessible without a
boat only during the lowest spring and autumn tides. Arianrod had
disowned her son, and did not recognize him when she saw him with
Gwydion. She asked who he was, and was much displeased when told. She
demanded to know his name, and, when Gwydion replied that he had as yet
received none, she "laid a destiny upon" him, after the fashion of the
Celts, that he should be without a name until she chose to bestow one on
him herself.

To be without a name was a very serious thing to the ancient Britons,
who seem to have held the primitive theory that the name and the soul
are the same. So Gwydion cast about to think by what craft he might
extort from Arianrod some remark from which he could name their son. The
next day, he went down to the sea-shore with the boy, both of them
disguised as cordwainers. He made a boat out of sea-weed by magic, and
some beautifully-coloured leather out of some dry sticks and sedges.
Then they sailed the boat to the port of Arianrod's castle, and,
anchoring it where it could be seen, began ostentatiously to stitch away
at the leather. Naturally, they were soon noticed, and Arianrod sent
someone out to see who they were and what they were doing. When she
found that they were shoemakers, she remembered that she wanted some
shoes. Gwydion, though he had her measure, purposely made them, first
too large, and then too small. This brought Arianrod herself down to the
boat to be fitted.

While Gwydion was measuring Arianrod's foot for the shoes, a wren came
and stood upon the deck. The boy took his bow and arrow, and hit the
wren in the leg-a favourite shot of Celtic "crack" archers, at any rate
in romance. The goddess was pleased to be amiable and complimentary.
"Truly," said she, "the lion aimed at it with a steady hand." It is from
such incidents that primitive people take their names, all the world
over. The boy had got his. "It is no thanks to you," said Gwydion to
Arianrod, "but now he has a name. And a good name it is. He shall be
called Llew Llaw Gyffes[306]."

This name of the sun-god is a good example of how obsolete the ancient
pagan tradition had become before it was put into writing. The old word
_Lleu_, meaning "light", had passed out of use, and the scribe
substituted for a name that was unintelligible to him one like it which
he knew, namely _Llew_, meaning "lion". The word _Gyffes_ seems also to
have suffered change, and to have meant originally not "steady", but
"long"[307].

At any rate, Arianrod was defeated in her design to keep her son
nameless. Neither did she even get her shoes; for, as soon as he had
gained his object, Gwydion allowed the boat to change back into
sea-weed, and the leather to return to sedge and sticks. So, in her
anger, she put a fresh destiny on the boy, that he should not take arms
till she herself gave them him.

Gwydion, however, took Lleu to Dinas Dinllev, his castle, which still
stands at the edge of the Menai Straits, and brought him up as a
warrior. As soon as he thought him old enough to have arms, he took him
with him again to Caer Arianrod. This time, they were disguised as
bards. Arianrod received them gladly, heard Gwydion's songs and tales,
feasted them, and prepared a room for them to sleep in.

The next morning, Gwydion got up very early, and prepared his most
powerful incantations. By his druidical arts he made it seem as if the
whole country rang with the shouts and trumpets of an army, and he put a
glamour over everyone, so that they saw the bay filled with ships.
Arianrod came to him in terror, asking what could be done to protect the
castle. "Give us arms," he replied, "and we will do the best we can." So
Arianrod's maidens armed Gwydion, while Arianrod herself put arms on
Lleu. By the time she had finished, all the noises had ceased, and the
ships had vanished. "Let us take our arms off again," said Gwydion; "we
shall not need them now." "But the army is all round the castle!" cried
Arianrod. "There was no army," answered Gwydion; "it was only an
illusion of mine to cause you to break your prophecy and give our son
arms. And now he has got them, without thanks to you." "Then I will lay
a worse destiny on him," cried the infuriated goddess. "He shall never
have a wife of the people of this earth." "He shall have a wife in spite
of you," said Gwydion.

So Gwydion went to Mth, his uncle and tutor in magic, and between them
they made a woman out of flowers by charms and illusion. "They took the
blossoms of the oak, and the blossoms of the broom, and the blossoms of
the meadow-sweet, and produced from them a maiden, the fairest and most
graceful that man ever saw." They called her Blodeuwedd (Flower-face),
and gave her to Lleu as his wife. And they gave Lleu a palace called Mur
y Castell, near Bala Lake.

All went well until, one day, Gronw Pebyr, one of the gods of darkness,
came by, hunting, and killed the stag at nightfall near Lleu's castle.
The sun-god was away upon a visit to Mth, but Blodeuwedd asked the
stranger to take shelter with her. That night they fell in love with one
another, and conspired together how Lleu might be put away. When Lleu
came back from Mth's court, Blodeuwedd, like a Celtic Dalilah, wormed
out of him the secret of how his life was preserved. He told her that he
could only die in one way; he could not be killed either inside or
outside a house, either on horseback or on foot, but that if a spear
that had been a year in the making, and which was never worked upon
except during the sacrifice on Sunday, were to be cast at him as he
stood beneath a roof of thatch, after having just bathed, with one foot
upon the edge of the bath and the other upon a buck goat's back, it
would cause his death. Blodeuwedd piously thanked Heaven that he was so
well protected, and sent a messenger to her paramour, telling him what
she had learned. Gronw set to work on the spear; and in a year it was
ready. When she knew this, Blodeuwedd asked Lleu to show her exactly how
it was he could be killed.

Lleu agreed; and Blodeuwedd prepared the bath under the thatched roof,
and tethered the goat by it. Lleu bathed, and then stood with one foot
upon the edge of the bath, and the other upon the goat's back. At this
moment, Gronw, from an ambush, flung the spear, and hit Lleu, who, with
a terrible cry, changed into an eagle, and flew away. He never came
back; and Gronw took possession of both his wife and his palace.

But Gwydion set out to search everywhere for his son. At last, one day,
he came to a house in North Wales where the man was in great anxiety
about his sow; for as soon as the sty was opened, every morning, she
rushed out, and did not return again till late in the evening. Gwydion
offered to follow her, and, at dawn, the man took him to the sty, and
opened the door. The sow leaped forth, and ran, and Gwydion ran after
her. He tracked her to a brook between Snowdon and the sea, still called
Nant y Llew, and saw her feeding underneath an oak. Upon the top of the
tree there was an eagle, and, every time it shook itself, there fell off
it lumps of putrid meat, which the sow ate greedily. Gwydion suspected
that the eagle must be Lleu. So he sang this verse:

  "Oak that grows between the two banks;
   Darkened is the sky and hill!
   Shall I not tell him by his wounds,
   That this is Lleu?"

The eagle, on hearing this, came half-way down the tree. So Gwydion
sang:

  "Oak that grows in upland ground,
   Is it not wetted by the rain? Has it not been drenched
   By nine score tempests?
   It bears in its branches Lleu Llaw Gyffes."

The eagle came slowly down until it was on the lowest branch. Gwydion
sang:

  "Oak that grows beneath the steep;
   Stately and majestic is its aspect!
   Shall I not speak it?
   That Lleu will come to my lap?"

Then the eagle came down, and sat on Gwydion's knee. Gwydion struck it
with his magic wand, and it became Lleu again, wasted to skin and bone
by the poison on the spear.

Gwydion took him to Mth to be healed, and left him there, while he went
to Mur y Castell, where Blodeuwedd was. When she heard that he was
coming, she fled. But Gwydion overtook her, and changed her into an owl,
the bird that hates the day. A still older form of this probably
extremely ancient myth of the sun-god-the savage and repulsive details
of which speak of a hoary antiquity-makes the chase of Blodeuwedd by
Gwydion to have taken place in the sky, the stars scattered over the
Milky Way being the traces of it.[308] As for her accomplice, Lleu would
accept no satisfaction short of Gronw's submitting to stand exactly
where Lleu had stood, to be shot at in his turn. To this he was obliged
to agree; and Lleu killed him.[309]

There are two other sons of Beli and Dn of whom so little is recorded
that it would hardly be worth while mentioning them, were it not for the
wild poetry of the legend connected with them. The tale, put into
writing at a time when all the gods were being transfigured into simple
mortals, tells us that they were two kings of Britain, brothers. One
starlight night they were walking together. "See," said Nynniaw to
Peibaw, "what a fine, wide-spreading field I have." "Where is it?" asked
Peibaw. "There," replied Nynniaw; "the whole stretch of the sky, as far
as the eye reaches." "Look then," returned Peibaw, "what a number of
cattle I have grazing on your field." "Where are they?" asked Nynniaw.
"All the stars that you can see," replied Peibaw, "every one of them of
fiery-coloured gold, with the moon for a shepherd over them." "They
shall not feed on my field," cried Nynniaw. "They shall," exclaimed
Peibaw. "They shall not," cried Nynniaw, "They shall," said Peibaw.
"They shall not," Nynniaw answered; and so they went on, from
contradiction to quarrel, and from private quarrel to civil war, until
the armies of both of them were destroyed, and the two authors of the
evil were turned by God into oxen for their sins.[310]

Last of the children of Dn, we find a goddess called Penardun, of whom
little is known except that she was married to the sea-god Llyr. This
incident is curious, as forming a parallel to the Gaelic story which
tells of intermarriage between the Tuatha D Danann and the Fomors.[311]
Brigit, the Dagda's daughter, was married to Bress, son of Elathan,
while Cian, the son of Diancecht, wedded Ethniu, the daughter of Balor.
So, in this kindred mythology, a slender tie of relationship binds the
gods of the sky to the gods of the sea.

The name _Llyr_ is supposed, like its Irish equivalent Lr, to have
meant "the Sea".[312] The British sea-god is undoubtedly the same as the
Gaelic; indeed, the two facts that he is described in Welsh literature
as Llyr Llediath, that is, "Llyr of the Foreign Dialect", and is given a
wife called Iweridd (Ireland)[313], suggest that he may have been
borrowed by the Britons from the Gaels later than any mythology common
to both. As a British god, he was the far-off original of Shakespeare's
"King Lear". The chief city of his worship is still called after him,
Leicester, that is, Llyr-cestre, in still earlier days, Caer Llyr.

Llyr, we have noticed, married two wives, Penardun and Iweridd. By the
daughter of Dn he had a son called Manawyddan, who is identical with
the Gaelic Manannn mac Lir.[314] We know less of his character and
attributes than we do of the Irish god; but we find him equally a ruler
in that Hades or Elysium which the Celtic mind ever connected with the
sea. Like all the inhabitants of that other world, he is at once a
master of magic and of the useful arts, which he taught willingly to his
friends. To his enemies, however, he could show a different side of his
character. A triad tells us that-

  "The achievement of Manawyddan the Wise,
   After lamentation and fiery wrath,
   Was the constructing of the bone-fortress of Oeth and Anoeth",[315]

which is described as a prison made, in the shape of a bee-hive,
entirely of human bones mortared together, and divided into innumerable
cells, forming a kind of labyrinth. In this ghastly place he immured
those whom he found trespassing in Hades; and among his captives was no
less a person than the famous Arthur.[316]

"Ireland" bore two children to Llyr: a daughter called Branwen and a son
called Brn. The little we know of Branwen of the "Fair Bosom" shows her
as a goddess of love-child, like the Greek Aphrodit, of the sea. Brn,
on the other hand, is, even more clearly than Manawyddan, a dark deity
of Hades. He is represented as of colossal size, so huge, in fact, that
no house or ship was big enough to hold him.[317] He delighted in battle
and carnage, like the hoodie-crow or raven from which he probably took
his name,[318] but he was also the especial patron of bards, minstrels,
and musicians, and we find him in one of the poems ascribed to Taliesin
claiming to be himself a bard, a harper, a player on the crowth, and
seven-score other musicians all at once.[319] His son was called
Caradawc the Strong-armed, who, as the British mythology crumbled,
became confounded with the historical Caratacus, known popularly as
"Caractacus".

Both Brn and Manawyddan were especially connected with the Swansea
peninsula. The bone-fortress of Oeth and Anoeth was placed by tradition
in Gower.[320] That Brn was equally at home there may be proved from
the Morte Darthur, in which storehouse of forgotten and misunderstood
mythology Brn of Gower survives as "King Brandegore".[321]

Such identification of a mere mortal country with the other world seems
strange enough to us, but to our Celtic ancestors it was a quite natural
thought. All islands-and peninsulas, which, viewed from an opposite
coast, probably seemed to them islands-were deemed to be pre-eminently
homes of the dark Powers of Hades. Difficult of access, protected by the
turbulent and dangerous sea, sometimes rendered quite invisible by fogs
and mists and, at other times, looming up ghostlily on the horizon,
often held by the remnant of a hostile lower race, they gained a mystery
and a sanctity from the law of the human mind which has always held the
unknown to be the terrible. The Cornish Britons, gazing from the shore,
saw Gower and Lundy, and deemed them outposts of the over-sea Other
World. To the Britons of Wales, Ireland was no human realm, a view
reciprocated by the Gaels, who saw Hades in Britain, while the Isle of
Man was a little Hades common to them both. Nor even was the sea always
necessary to sunder the world of ghosts from that of "shadow-casting
men". Glastonbury Tor, surrounded by almost impassable swamps, was one
of the especial haunts of Gwyn ap Nudd. The Britons of the north held
that beyond the Roman wall and the vast Caledonian wood lived ghosts and
not men. Even the Roman province of Demetia-called by the Welsh Dyfed,
and corresponding, roughly, to the modern County of Pembrokeshire-was,
as a last stronghold of the aborigines, identified with the mythic
underworld.

As such, Dyfed was ruled by a local tribe of gods, whose greatest
figures were Pwyll, "Head of Annwn" (the Welsh name for Hades), with his
wife Rhiannon, and their son Pryderi. These beings are described as
hostile to the children of Dn, but friendly to the race of Llyr. After
Pwyll's death or disappearance, his widow Rhiannon becomes the wife of
Manawyddan.[322] In a poem of Taliesin's we find Manawyddan and Pryderi
joint-rulers of Hades, and warders of that magic cauldron of
inspiration[323] which the gods of light attempted to steal or capture,
and which became famous afterwards as the "Holy Grail". Another of their
treasures were the "Three Birds of Rhiannon", which, we are told in an
ancient book, could sing the dead to life and the living into the sleep
of death. Fortunately they sang seldom. "There are three things," says a
Welsh triad, "which are not often heard: the song of the birds of
Rhiannon, a song of wisdom from the mouth of a Saxon, and an invitation
to a feast from a miser."

Nor is the list of British gods complete without mention of Arthur,
though most readers will be surprised to find him in such company. The
genius of Tennyson, who drew his materials mostly from the Norman-French
romances, has stereotyped the popular conception of Arthur as a king of
early Britain who fought for his fatherland and the Christian faith
against invading Saxons. Possibly there may, indeed, have been a
powerful British chieftain bearing that typically Celtic name, which is
found in Irish legend as Artur, one of the sons of Nemed who fought
against the Fomors, and on the Continent as Artaius, a Gaulish deity
whom the Romans identified with Mercury, and who seems to have been a
patron of agriculture.[324] But the original Arthur stands upon the same
ground as Cuchulainn and Finn. His deeds are mythical, because
superhuman. His companions can be shown to have been divine. Some we
know were worshipped in Gaul. Others are children of Dn, of Llyr, and
of Pwyll, dynasties of older gods to whose head Arthur seems to have
risen, as his cult waxed and theirs waned. Stripped of their godhead,
and strangely transformed, they fill the pages of romance as Knights of
the Table Round.

These deities were the native gods of Britain. Many others are, however,
mentioned upon inscriptions found in our island, but these were almost
all exotic and imported. Imperial Rome brought men of diverse races
among her legions, and these men brought their gods. Scattered over
Britain, but especially in the north, near the Wall, we find evidence
that deities of many nations-from Germany to Africa, and from Gaul to
Persia-were sporadically worshipped.[325] Most of these foreign gods
were Roman, but a temple at Eboracum (now York) was dedicated to
Serapis, and Mithras, the Persian sun-god, was also adored there; while
at Corbridge, in Northumberland (the ancient Corspitium), there have
been found altars to the Tyrian Hercules and to Astarte. The war-god was
also invoked under many strange names-as "Cocidius" by a colony of
Dacians in Cumberland; as Toutates, Camulus, Coritiacus, Belatucador,
Alator, Loucetius, Condates, and Rigisamos by men of different
countries. A goddess of war was worshipped at Bath under the name of
Nemetona. The hot springs of the same town were under the patronage of a
divinity called Sul, identified by the Romans with Minerva, and she was
helped by a god of medicine described on a dedicatory tablet as "Sol
Apollo Anicetus". Few of these "strange gods", however, seem to have
taken hold of the imagination of the native Britons. Their worshippers
did not proselytize, and their general influence was probably about
equal to that of an Evangelical Church in a Turkish town. The sole
exceptions to this rule are where the foreign gods are Gaulish; but in
several instances it can be proved that they were not so much of Roman,
as of original Celtic importation. The warlike heaven-god Camulus
appears in Gaelic heroic myth as Cumhal, the father of Finn, and in
British mythical history as Coel, a duke of Caer Coelvin (known earlier
as Camulodunum, and now as Colchester), who seized the crown of Britain,
and spent his short reign in a series of battles.[326] The name of the
sun-god Maponos is found alike upon altars in Gaul and Britain, and in
Welsh literature as Mabon, a follower of Arthur; while another Gaulish
sun-god, Belinus, who had a splendid temple at Bajocassos (the modern
Bayeux), though not mentioned in the earliest British mythology, as its
scattered records have come down to us, must have been connected with
Brn, for we find in Geoffrey of Monmouth's History "King Belinus" as
brother of "King Brennius",[327] and in the Morte Darthur "Balin" as
brother of "Balan".[328] A second-century Greek writer gives an account
of a god of eloquence worshipped in Gaul under the name of Ogmios, and
represented as equipped like Heracles, a description which exactly
corresponds to the conception of the Gaelic Ogma, at once patron of
literature and writing and professional strong man of the Tuatha D
Danann. Nemetona, the war-goddess worshipped at Bath, was probably the
same as Nemon, one of Nuada's Valkyr-wives, while a broken inscription
to _athubodva_, which probably stood, when intact, for _Cathubodva_, may
well have been addressed to the Gaulish equivalent of Badb Catha, the
"War-fury". Lugh, or Lleu, was also widely known on the Continent as
Lugus. Three important towns-Laon, Leyden, and Lyons-were all anciently
called after him _Lugu-dunum_ (Lugus' town), and at the last and
greatest of these a festival was still held in Roman times upon the
sun-god's day-the first of August-which corresponded to the _Lugnassad_
(Lugh's commemoration) held in ancient Ireland. Brigit, the Gaelic
Minerva, is also found in Britain as Brigantia, tutelary goddess of the
Brigantes, a Northern tribe, and in Eastern France as Brigindo, to whom
Iccavos, son of Oppianos, made a dedicatory offering of which there is
still record.[329]

Other, less striking agreements between the mythical divine names of the
Insular and Continental Celts might be cited. These recorded should,
however, prove sufficiently that Gaul, Gael, and Briton shared in a
common heritage of mythological names and ideas, which they separately
developed into three superficially different, but essentially similar
cults.

-----

Footnote 282:

  Lady Guest's _Mabinogion_, a note to _Math, the Son of Mathonwy_.

Footnote 283:

  _The Story of Lludd and Llevelys._ See chap. XXIV-"The Decline and
  Fall of the Gods".

Footnote 284:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 128.

Footnote 285:

  See a monograph by the Right Hon. Charles Bathurst: _Roman Antiquities
  in Lydney Park, Gloucestershire_.

Footnote 286:

  chap. XXIV-"The Decline and Fall of the Gods".

Footnote 287:

  _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 178, 179.

Footnote 288:

  So translated by Lady Guest. Professor Rhys, however, renders it, "in
  whom God has put the instinct of the demons of Annwn". _Arthurian
  Legend_, p. 341.

Footnote 289:

  Lady Guest's _Mabinogion_. Note to "Kulhwch and Olwen".

Footnote 290:

  Black Book of Caermarthen, poem XXXIII. Vol. I, p. 293, of Skene's
  _Four Ancient Books_.

Footnote 291:

  I have taken the liberty of omitting a few lines whose connection with
  their context is not very apparent.

Footnote 292:

  Gwyn was said to specially frequent the summits of hills.

Footnote 293:

  This line is Professor Rhys's. Skene translates it: "Whilst I am
  called Gwyn the son of Nudd".

Footnote 294:

  I have here preferred Rhys's rendering: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 364.

Footnote 295:

  A name for Hades, of unknown meaning.

Footnote 296:

  Dormarth means "Death's Door". Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, pp. 156-158.

Footnote 297:

  Rhys has it:

                "Dormarth, red-nosed, ground-grazing-
                 On him we perceived the speed
                 Of thy wandering on Cloud Mount."

                              -_Arthurian Legend_, p. 156.

Footnote 298:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 383. Skene translates: "I am alive, they
  in their graves!"

Footnote 299:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 561.

Footnote 300:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 561-563.

Footnote 301:

  Dyer: _Studies of the Gods in Greece_, p. 48.

  Gwyn, son of Nudd, had a brother, Edeyrn, of whom so little has come
  down to us that he finds his most suitable place in a foot-note.
  Unmentioned in the earliest Welsh legends, he first appears as a
  knight of Arthur's court in the _Red Book_ stories of "Kulhwch and
  Olwen", the "Dream of Rhonabwy", and "Geraint, the Son of Erbin". He
  accompanied Arthur on his expedition to Rome, and is said also to have
  slain "three most atrocious giants" at Brentenol (Brent Knoll), near
  Glastonbury. His name occurs in a catalogue of Welsh saints, where he
  is described as a bard, and the chapel of Bodedyrn, near Holyhead,
  still stands to his honour. Modern readers will know him from
  Tennyson's Idyll of "Geraint and Enid", which follows very closely the
  Welsh romance of "Geraint, the Son of Erbin".

Footnote 302:

  Rhys-who calls him "a Cambrian Pluto": _Lectures on Welsh Philology_,
  p. 414.

Footnote 303:

  _Book of Taliesin_, XLIII. _The Death-song of Dylan, Son of the Wave_,
  Vol. I, p. 288 of Skene.

Footnote 304:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 387.

Footnote 305:

  Rhys: _Celtic Folklore_, p. 210.

Footnote 306:

  _i.e._ The Lion with the Steady Hand.

Footnote 307:

  See Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, note to p. 237.

Footnote 308:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 240.

Footnote 309:

  Retold from the Mabinogi of _Math, Son of Mathonwy_, in Lady Guest's
  _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 310:

  The Iolo Manuscripts: collected by Edward Williams, the bard, at about
  the beginning of the nineteenth century-_The Tale of Rhitta Gawr_.

Footnote 311:

  See Chapter VII-"The Rise of the Sun-God".

Footnote 312:

  Rhys: _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_, p. 130.

Footnote 313:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 130.

Footnote 314:

  The old Irish tract called _Coir Anmann_ (the _Choice of Names_) says:
  "Manannan mac Lir ... the Britons and the men of Erin deemed that he
  was the god of the sea".

Footnote 315:

  _Iolo MSS._, stanza 18 of _The Stanzas of the Achievements_, composed
  by the Azure Bard of the Chair.

Footnote 316:

  See note to chap. XXII-"The Treasures of Britain".

Footnote 317:

  Mabinogi of _Branwen, Daughter of Llyr_.

Footnote 318:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 245.

Footnote 319:

  _Book of Taliesin_, poem XLVIII, in Skene's _Four Ancient Books of
  Wales_, Vol. I, p. 297.

Footnote 320:

  The _Verses of the Graves of the Warriors_, in the Black Book of
  Caermarthen. See also Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 347.

Footnote 321:

  Rhys: _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_, p. 160.

Footnote 322:

  Mabinogi of _Manawyddan, Son of Llyr_.

Footnote 323:

  _Book of Taliesin_, poem xiv, Vol. I, p. 276, of Skene.

Footnote 324:

  Rhys: _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_, p. 48 and note.

Footnote 325:

  See a paper in the _Edinburgh Review_ for July, 1851-"The Romans in
  Britain".

Footnote 326:

  It is said that the "Old King Cole" of the popular ballad, who "was a
  merry old soul", represents the last faint tradition of the Celtic
  god.

Footnote 327:

  _Geoffrey of Monmouth_, Book III, chap. I.

Footnote 328:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book I, chap. XVI.

Footnote 329:

  For full account of Gaulish gods, and their Gaelic and British
  affinities, see Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, I and II-"The Gaulish
  Pantheon".

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XVII

                  THE ADVENTURES OF THE GODS OF HADES


It is with the family of Pwyll, deities connected with the south-west
corner of Wales, called by the Romans Demetia, and by the Britons Dyfed,
and, roughly speaking, identical with the modern county of
Pembrokeshire, that the earliest consecutive accounts of the British
gods begin. The first of the Four Branches of the Mabinogi tell us how
"Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed", gained the right to be called _Pen Annwn_, the
"Head of Hades". Indeed, it almost seems as if it had been deliberately
written to explain how the same person could be at once a mere mortal
prince, however legendary, and a ruler in the mystic Other World, and so
to reconcile two conflicting traditions.[330] But to an earlier age than
that in which the legend was put into a literary shape, such forced
reconciliation would not have been needed; for the two legends would not
have been considered to conflict. When Pwyll, head of Annwn, was a
mythic person whose tradition was still alive, the unexplored, rugged,
and savage country of Dyfed, populated by the aboriginal Iberians whom
the Celt had driven into such remote districts, appeared to those who
dwelt upon the eastern side of its dividing river, the Taw, at least a
dependency of Annwn, if not that weird realm itself. But, as men grew
bolder, the frontier was crossed, and Dyfed entered and traversed, and
found to be not so unlike other countries. Its inhabitants, if not of
Celtic race, were yet of flesh and blood. So that, though the province
still continued to bear to a late date the names of the "Land of
Illusion" and the "Realm of Glamour",[331] it was no longer deemed to be
Hades itself. That fitful and shadowy country had folded its tents, and
departed over or under seas.

The story of "Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed",[332] tells us how there was war
in Annwn between its two kings-or between two, perhaps, of its many
chieftains. Arawn ("Silver-Tongue") and Havgan ("Summer-White") each
coveted the dominions of the other. In the continual contests between
them, Arawn was worsted, and in despair he visited the upper earth to
seek for a mortal ally.

At this time Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed, held his court at Narberth. He had,
however, left his capital upon a hunting expedition to Glyn Cch, known
to-day as a valley upon the borders of the two counties of Pembroke and
Carmarthen. Like so many kings of European and Oriental romance, when an
adventure is at hand, he became separated from his party, and was, in
modern parlance, "thrown out". He could, however, still hear the music
of his hounds, and was listening to them, when he also distinguished the
cry of another pack coming towards him. As he watched and listened, a
stag came into view; and the strange hounds pulled it down almost at his
feet. At first Pwyll hardly looked at the stag, he was so taken up with
gazing at the hounds, for "of all the hounds that he had seen in the
world, he had never seen any that were like unto these. For their hair
was of a brilliant shining white, and their ears were red; and as the
whiteness of their bodies shone, so did the redness of their ears
glisten." They were, indeed, though Pwyll does not seem to have known
it, of the true Hades breed-the snow-white, red-eared hounds we meet in
Gaelic legends, and which are still said to be sometimes heard and seen
scouring the hills of Wales by night. Seeing no rider with the hounds,
Pwyll drove them away from the dead stag, and called up his own pack to
it.

While he was doing this, a man "upon a large, light-gray steed, with a
hunting-horn round his neck, and clad in garments of gray woollen in the
fashion of a hunting garb" appeared, and rated Pwyll for his
unsportsmanlike conduct. "Greater discourtesy," said he, "I never saw
than your driving away my dogs after they had killed the stag, and
calling your own to it. And though I may not be revenged upon you for
this, I swear that I will do you more damage than the value of a hundred
stags."

Pwyll expressed his contrition, and, asking the new-comer's name and
rank, offered to atone for his fault. The stranger told his name-Arawn,
a king of Annwn-and said that Pwyll could gain his forgiveness only in
one way, by going to Annwn instead of him, and fighting for him with
Havgan. Pwyll agreed to do this, and the King of Hades put his own
semblance upon the mortal prince, so that not a person in Annwn-not even
Arawn's own wife-would know that he was not that king. He led him by a
secret path into Annwn, and left him before his castle, charging him to
return to the place where they had first met, at the end of a year from
that day. On the other hand, Arawn took on Pwyll's shape, and went to
Narberth.

No one in Annwn suspected Pwyll of being anyone else than their king. He
spent the year in ruling the realm, in hunting, minstrelsy, and
feasting. Both by day and night, he had the company of Arawn's wife, the
most beautiful woman he had ever yet seen, but he refrained from taking
advantage of the trust placed in him. At last the day came when he was
to meet Havgan in single combat. One blow settled it; for Pwyll,
Havgan's destined conqueror, thrust his antagonist an arm's and a
spear's length over the crupper of his horse, breaking his shield and
armour, and mortally wounding him. Havgan was carried away to die, and
Pwyll, in the guise of Arawn, received the submission of the dead king's
subjects, and annexed his realm. Then he went back to Glyn Cch, to keep
his tryst with Arawn.

They retook their own shapes, and each returned to his own kingdom.
Pwyll learned that Dyfed had never been ruled so well, or been so
prosperous, as during the year just passed. As for the King of Hades, he
found his enemy gone, and his domains extended. And when he caressed his
wife, she asked him why he did so now, after the lapse of a whole year.
So he told her the truth, and they both agreed that they had indeed got
a true friend in Pwyll.

After this, the kings of Annwn and Dyfed made their friendship strong
between them. From that time forward, says the story, Pwyll was no
longer called Prince of Dyfed, but _Pen Annwn_, "the Head of Hades".

The second mythological incident in the Mabinogi of Pwyll, Prince of
Dyfed, tells how the Head of Hades won his wife, Rhiannon, thought by
Professor Rhys to have been a goddess either of the dawn or of the
moon.[333] There was a mound outside Pwyll's palace at Narberth which
had a magical quality. To anyone who sat upon it there happened one of
two things: either he received wounds and blows, or else he saw a
wonder. One day, it occurred to Pwyll that he would like to try the
experience of the mound. So he went and sat upon it.

No unseen blows assailed Pwyll, but he had not been sitting long upon
the mound before he saw, coming towards him, "a lady on a pure-white
horse of large size, with a garment of shining gold around her", riding
very quietly. He sent a man on foot to ask her who she was, but, though
she seemed to be moving so slowly, the man could not come up to her. He
failed utterly to overtake her, and she passed on out of sight.

The next day, Pwyll went again to the mound. The lady appeared, and,
this time, Pwyll sent a horseman. At first, the horseman only ambled
along at about the same pace at which the lady seemed to be going; then,
failing to get near her, he urged his horse into a gallop. But, whether
he rode slow or fast, he could come no closer to the lady than before,
although she seemed to the eyes of those who watched to have been going
only at a foot's pace.

The day after that, Pwyll determined to accost the lady himself. She
came at the same gentle walk, and Pwyll at first rode easily, and then
at his horse's topmost speed, but with the same result, or lack of it.
At last, in despair, he called to the mysterious damsel to stop. "I will
stop gladly," said she, "and it would have been better for your horse if
you had asked me before." She told him that her name was Rhiannon,
daughter of Heveydd the Ancient. The nobles of her realm had determined
to give her in marriage against her will, so she had come to seek out
Pwyll, who was the man of her choice. Pwyll was delighted to hear this,
for he thought that she was the most beautiful lady he had ever seen.
Before they parted, they had plighted troth, and Pwyll had promised to
appear on that day twelvemonth at the palace of her father, Heveydd.
Then she vanished, and Pwyll returned to Narberth.

At the appointed time, Pwyll went to visit Heveydd the Ancient, with a
hundred followers. He was received with much welcome, and the
disposition of the feast put under his command, as the Celts seem to
have done to especially honoured guests. As they sat at meat, with Pwyll
between Rhiannon and her father, a tall auburn-haired youth came into
the hall, greeted Pwyll, and asked a boon of him. "Whatever boon you may
ask of me," said Pwyll thoughtlessly, "if it is in my power, you shall
have it." Then the suitor threw off all disguise, called the guests to
witness Pwyll's promise, and claimed Rhiannon as his bride. Pwyll was
dumb. "Be silent as long as you will," said the masterful Rhiannon;
"never did a man make worse use of his wits than you have done." "Lady,"
replied the amazed Pwyll, "I knew not who he was." "He is the man to
whom they would have given me against my will," she answered, "Gwawl,
the son of Cld. You must bestow me upon him now, lest shame befall
you." "Never will I do that," said Pwyll. "Bestow me upon him," she
insisted, "and I will cause that I shall never be his." So Pwyll
promised Gwawl that he would make a feast that day year, at which he
would resign Rhiannon to him.

The next year, the feast was made, and Rhiannon sat by the side of her
unwelcome bridegroom. But Pwyll was waiting outside the palace, with a
hundred men in ambush. When the banquet was at its height, he came into
the hall, dressed in coarse, ragged garments, shod with clumsy old
shoes, and carrying a leather bag. But the bag was a magic one, which
Rhiannon had given to her lover, with directions as to its use. Its
quality was that, however much was put into it, it could never be
filled. "I crave a boon," he said to Gwawl. "What is it?" Gwawl replied.
"I am a poor man, and all I ask is to have this bag filled with meat."
Gwawl granted what he said was "a request within reason", and ordered
his followers to fill the bag. But the more they put into it, the more
room in it there seemed to be. Gwawl was astonished, and asked why this
was. Pwyll replied that it was a bag that could never be filled until
someone possessed of lands and riches should tread the food down with
both his feet. "Do this for the man," said Rhiannon to Gwawl. "Gladly I
will," replied he, and put both his feet into the bag. But no sooner had
he done so than Pwyll slipped the bag over Gwawl's head, and tied it up
at the mouth. He blew his horn, and all his followers came in. "What
have you got in the bag?" asked each one in turn. "A badger," replied
Pwyll. Then each, as he received Pwyll's answer, kicked the bag, or hit
it with a stick. "Then," says the story, "was the game of Badger in the
Bag' first played."

Gwawl, however, fared better than we suspect that the badger usually
did; for Heveydd the Ancient interceded for him. Pwyll willingly
released him, on condition that he promised to give up all claim to
Rhiannon, and renounced all projects of revenge. Gwawl consented, and
gave sureties, and went away to his own country to have his bruises
healed.

This country of Gwawl's was, no doubt, the sky; for he was evidently a
sun-god. His name bewrays him; for the meaning of "Gwawl" is
"light".[334] It was one of the hours of victory for the dark powers,
such as were celebrated in the Celtic calendar by the Feast of Samhain,
or Summer End.

There was no hindrance now to the marriage of Pwyll and Rhiannon. She
became his bride, and returned with him to Dyfed.

For three years, they were without an heir, and the nobles of Dyfed
became discontented. They petitioned Pwyll to take another wife instead
of Rhiannon. He asked for a year's delay. This was granted, and, before
the end of the year, a son was born. But, on the night of his birth, the
six women set to keep watch over Rhiannon all fell asleep at once; and
when they woke up, the boy had vanished. Fearful lest their lives should
be forfeited for their neglect, they agreed to swear that Rhiannon had
eaten her child. They killed a litter of puppies, and smeared some of
the blood on Rhiannon's face and hands, and put some of the bones by her
side. Then they awoke her with a great outcry, and accused her. She
swore that she knew nothing of the death of her son, but the women
persisted that they had seen her devour him, and had been unable to
prevent it. The druids of that day were not sufficiently practical
anatomists to be able to tell the bones of a child from those of a dog,
so they condemned Rhiannon upon the evidence of the women. But, even
now, Pwyll would not put her away; so she was assigned a penance. For
seven years, she was to sit by a horse-block outside the gate, and offer
to carry visitors into the palace upon her back. "But it rarely
happened," says the Mabinogi, "that any would permit her to do so."

Exactly what had become of Rhiannon's child seems to have been a mystery
even to the writer of the Mabinogi. It was, at any rate, in some way
connected with the equally mysterious disappearance on every night of
the first of May-Beltaine, the Celtic sun-festival-of the colts foaled
by a beautiful mare belonging to Teirnyon Twryv Vliant, one of Pwyll's
vassals. Every May-day night, the mare foaled, but no one knew what
became of the colt. Teirnyon decided to find out. He caused the mare to
be taken into a house, and there he watched it, fully armed. Early in
the night, the colt was born. Then there was a great noise, and an arm
with claws came through the window, and gripped the colt's mane.
Teirnyon hacked at the arm with his sword, and cut it off. Then he heard
wailing, and opened the door, and found a baby in swaddling clothes,
wrapped in a satin mantle. He took it up and brought it to his wife, and
they decided to adopt it. They called the boy Gwri Wallt Euryn, that is
"Gwri of the Golden Hair".

The older the boy grew, the more it seemed to Teirnyon that he became
like Pwyll. Then he remembered that he had found him upon the very night
that Rhiannon lost her child. So he consulted with his wife, and they
both agreed that the baby they had so mysteriously found must be the
same that Rhiannon had so mysteriously lost. And they decided that it
would not be right for them to keep the son of another, while so good a
lady as Rhiannon was being punished wrongfully.

So, the very next day, Teirnyon set out for Narberth, taking the boy
with him. They found Rhiannon sitting, as usual, by the gate, but they
would not allow her to carry them into the palace on her back. Pwyll
welcomed them; and that evening, as they sat at supper, Teirnyon told
his hosts the story from beginning to end. And he presented her son to
Rhiannon.

As soon as everyone in the palace saw the boy, they admitted that he
must be Pwyll's son. So they adopted him with delight; and Pendaran
Dyfed, the head druid of the kingdom, gave him a new name. He called him
"Pryderi[335]", meaning "trouble", from the first word that his mother
had uttered when he was restored to her. For she had said: "_Trouble_
is, indeed, at an end for me, if this be true".

-----

Footnote 330:

  Rhys: _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_, p. 282.

Footnote 331:

  It is constantly so-called by the fourteenth-century Welsh poet,
  Dafydd ab Gwilym, so much admired by George Borrow.

Footnote 332:

  This chapter is retold from Lady Guest's translation of the Mabinogi
  of _Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed_.

Footnote 333:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 678.

Footnote 334:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 123 and note. Cld was probably the
  goddess of the River Clyde. See Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 294.

Footnote 335:

  Pronounced _Pridary_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                     THE WOOING OF BRANWEN AND THE
                         BEHEADING OF BRN[336]


In the second of the "Four Branches", Pryderi, come to man's estate, and
married to a wife called Kicva, appears as a guest or vassal at the
court of a greater god of Hades than himself-Brn, the son of the
sea-god Llyr. The children of Llyr-Brn, with his sister Branwen of the
"Fair Bosom" and his half-brother Manawyddan, as well as two sons of
Manawyddan's mother, Penardun, by an earlier marriage, were holding
court at _Twr Branwen_, "Branwen's Tower", now called Harlech. As they
sat on a cliff, looking over the sea, they saw thirteen ships coming
from Ireland. The fleet sailed close under the land, and Brn sent
messengers to ask who they were, and why they had come. It was replied
that they were the vessels of Matholwch, King of Ireland, and that he
had come to ask Brn for his sister Branwen in marriage. Brn consented,
and they fixed upon Aberffraw, in Anglesey, as the place at which to
hold the wedding feast. Matholwch and his fleet went there by sea, and
Brn and his host by land. When they arrived, and met, they set up
pavilions; for "no house could ever hold the blessed Brn". And there
Branwen became the King of Ireland's bride.[337]

These relations were not long, however, allowed to be friendly. Of the
two other sons of Llyr's wife, Penardun, the mother of Manawyddan, one
was called Nissyen, and the other, Evnissyen. Nissyen was a lover of
peace, and would always "cause his family to be friends when their wrath
was at the highest", but Evnissyen "would cause strife between his two
brothers when they were most at peace". Now Evnissyen was enraged
because his consent had not been asked to Branwen's marriage. Out of
spite at this, he cut off the lips, ears, eyebrows, and tails of all
Matholwch's horses.

When the King of Ireland found this out, he was very indignant at the
insult. But Brn sent an embassy to him twice, explaining that it had
not been done by his consent or with his knowledge. He appeased
Matholwch by giving him a sound horse in place of every one that
Evnissyen had mutilated, as well as a staff of silver as large and tall
as Matholwch himself, and a plate of gold as broad as Matholwch's face.
To these gifts he also added a magic cauldron brought from Ireland. Its
property was that any slain man who was put into it was brought to life
again, except that he lost the use of speech. The King of Ireland
accepted this recompense for the insult done him, renewed his friendship
with the children of Llyr, and sailed away with Branwen to Ireland.

Before a year was over, Branwen bore a son. They called him Gwern, and
put him out to be foster-nursed among the best men of Ireland. But,
during the second year, news came to Ireland of the insult that
Matholwch had received in Britain. The King of Ireland's foster-brothers
and near relations insisted that he should revenge himself upon Branwen.
So the queen was compelled to serve in the kitchen, and, every day, the
butcher gave her a box upon the ear. That this should not become known
to Brn, all traffic was forbidden between Ireland and Britain. This
went on for three years.

But, in the meantime, Branwen had reared a tame starling, and she taught
it to speak, and tied a letter of complaint to the root of its wing, and
sent it off to Britain. At last it found Brn, whom its mistress had
described to it, and settled upon his shoulder, ruffling its wings. This
exposed the letter, and Brn read it. He sent messengers to one hundred
and forty-four countries, to raise an army to go to Ireland. Leaving his
son Caradawc, with seven others, in charge of Britain, he
started-himself wading through the sea, while his men went by ship.

No one in Ireland knew that they were coming until the royal swineherds,
tending their pigs near the sea-shore, beheld a marvel. They saw a
forest on the surface of the sea-a place where certainly no forest had
been before-and, near it, a mountain with a lofty ridge on its top, and
a lake on each side of the ridge. Both the forest and the mountain were
swiftly moving towards Ireland. They informed Matholwch, who could not
understand it, and sent messengers to ask Branwen what she thought it
might be. "It is the men of the Island of the Mighty[338]," said she,
"who are coming here because they have heard of my ill-treatment. The
forest that is seen on the sea is made of the masts of ships. The
mountain is my brother Brn, wading into shoal water; the lofty ridge is
his nose, and the two lakes, one on each side of it, are his eyes."

The men of Ireland were terrified. They fled beyond the Shannon, and
broke down the bridge over it. But Brn lay down across the river, and
his army walked over him to the opposite side.

Matholwch now sent messengers suing for peace. He offered to resign the
throne of Ireland to Gwern, Branwen's son and Brn's nephew. "Shall I
not have the kingdom myself?" said Brn, and would not hear of anything
else. So the counsellors of Matholwch advised him to conciliate Brn by
building him a house so large that it would be the first house that had
ever held him, and, in it, to hand over the kingdom to his will. Brn
consented to accept this, and the vast house was built.

It concealed treachery. Upon each side of the hundred pillars of the
house was hung a bag, and in the bag was an armed man, who was to cut
himself out at a given signal. But Evnissyen came into the house, and
seeing the bags there, suspected the plot. "What is in this bag?" he
said to one of the Irish, as he came up to the first one. "Meal,"
replied the Irishman. Then Evnissyen kneaded the bag in his hands, as
though it really contained meal, until he had killed the man inside; and
he treated all of them in turn in the same way.

A little later, the two hosts met in the house. The men of Ireland came
in on one side, and the men of Britain on the other, and met at the
hearth in the middle, and sat down. The Irish court did homage to Brn,
and they crowned Gwern, Branwen's son, King of Ireland in place of
Matholwch. When the ceremonies were over, the boy went from one to
another of his uncles, to make acquaintance with them. Brn fondled and
caressed him, and so did Manawyddan, and Nissyen. But when he came to
Evnissyen, the wicked son of Penardun seized the child by the feet, and
dropped him head first into the great fire.

When Branwen saw her son killed, she tried to leap into the flames after
him, but Brn held her back. Then every man armed himself, and such a
tumult was never heard in one house before. Day after day they fought;
but the Irish had the advantage, for they had only to plunge their dead
men into the magic cauldron to bring them back to life. When Evnissyen
knew this, he saw a way of atoning for the misfortunes his evil nature
had brought upon Britain. He disguised himself as an Irishman, and lay
upon the floor as if dead, until they put him into the cauldron. Then he
stretched himself, and, with one desperate effort, burst both the
cauldron and his own heart.

Thus things were made equal again, and in the next battle the men of
Britain killed all the Irish. But of themselves there were only seven
left unhurt-Pryderi; Manawyddan; Gluneu, the son of Taran[339]; Taliesin
the Bard; Ynawc; Grudyen, the son of Muryel; and Heilyn, the son of
Gwynn the Ancient.

Brn himself was wounded in the foot with a poisoned dart, and was in
agony. So he ordered his seven surviving followers to cut off his head,
and to take it to the White Mount in London[340], and bury it there,
with the face towards France. He prophesied how they would perform the
journey. At Harlech they would be feasting seven years, the birds of
Rhiannon singing to them all the time, and Brn's own head conversing
with them as agreeably as when it was on his body. Then they would be
fourscore years at Gwales[341]. All this while, Brn's head would remain
uncorrupted, and would talk so pleasantly that they would forget the
flight of time. But, at the destined hour, someone would open a door
which looked towards Cornwall, and, after that, they could stay no
longer, but must hurry to London to bury the head.

So the seven beheaded Brn, and set off, taking Branwen also with them.
They landed at the mouth of the River Alaw, in Anglesey. Branwen first
looked back towards Ireland, and then forward towards Britain. "Alas,"
she cried, "that I was ever born! two islands have been destroyed
because of me." Her heart broke with sorrow, and she died. An old Welsh
poem says, with a touch of real pathos:

                "Softened were the voices in the brakes
                 Of the wondering birds
                 On seeing the fair body.
                 Will there not be relating again
                 Of that which befel the paragon
                 At the stream of Amlwch?"[342]

"They made her a four-sided grave," says the Mabinogi, "and buried her
upon the banks of the Alaw." The traditionary spot has always borne the
name of _Ynys Branwen_, and, curiously enough, an urn was found there,
in 1813, full of ashes and half-burnt bones, which certain enthusiastic
local antiquaries saw "every reason to suppose" were those of the fair
British Aphrodit herself.[343]

The seven went on towards Harlech, and, as they journeyed, they met men
and women who gave them the latest news. Caswallawn, a son of Beli, the
husband of Dn, had destroyed the ministers left behind by Brn to take
care of Britain. He had made himself invisible by the help of a magic
veil, and thus had killed all of them except Pendaran Dyfed,
foster-father of Pryderi, who had escaped into the woods, and Caradawc
son of Brn, whose heart had broken from grief. Thus he had made himself
king of the whole island in place of Manawyddan, its rightful heir now
that Brn was dead.

However, the destiny was upon the seven that they should go on with
their leader's head. They went to Harlech and feasted for seven years,
the three birds of Rhiannon singing them songs compared with which all
other songs seemed unmelodious. Then they spent fourscore years in the
Isle of Gwales, eating and drinking, and listening to the pleasant
conversation of Brn's head. The "Entertaining of the Noble Head" this
eighty years' feast was called. Brn's head, indeed, is almost more
notable in British mythology than Brn before he was decapitated.
Taliesin and the other bards invoke it repeatedly as _Urddawl Ben_ (the
"Venerable Head") and _Uther Ben_ (the "Wonderful Head").

But all pleasure came to an end when Heilyn, the son of Gwynn, opened
the forbidden door, like Bluebeard's wife, "to know if that was true
which was said concerning it". As soon as they looked towards Cornwall,
the glamour that had kept them merry for eighty-seven years failed, and
left them as grieved about the death of their lord as though it had
happened that very day. They could not rest for sorrow, but went at once
to London, and laid the now dumb and corrupting head in its grave on
Tower Hill, with its face turned towards France, to watch that no foe
came from foreign lands to Britain. There it reposed until, ages
afterwards, Arthur, in his pride of heart, dug it up, "as he thought it
beneath his dignity to hold the island otherwise than by valour".
Disaster, in the shape of

                            "the godless hosts
            Of heathen swarming o'er the Northern sea",[344]

came of this disinterment; and therefore it is called, in a triad, one
of the "Three Wicked Uncoverings of Britain".

-----

Footnote 336:

  Retold from Lady Guest's translation of the Mabinogi of _Branwen, the
  Daughter of Llyr_.

Footnote 337:

  Rhys-_Lectures on Welsh Philology_-compares Matholwch with Mth, and
  the story, generally, with the Greek myth of Persephon.

Footnote 338:

  A bardic name for Britain.

Footnote 339:

  This personage may have been the same as the Gaulish god Taranis.
  Mention, too, is made in an ancient Irish glossary of "Etirun, an idol
  of the Britons".

Footnote 340:

  This spot, called by a twelfth-century Welsh poet "The White Eminence
  of London, a place of splendid fame", was probably the hill on which
  the Tower of London now stands.

Footnote 341:

  The island of Gresholm, off the coast of Pembrokeshire.

Footnote 342:

  _The Gododin_ of Aneurin, as translated by T. Stephens. Branwen is
  there called "the lady Bradwen".

Footnote 343:

  See note to _Branwen, the Daughter of Llyr_ in Lady Guest's
  _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 344:

  Tennyson: _Idylls of the King_-"Guinevere".

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XIX

                      THE WAR OF ENCHANTMENTS[345]


Manawyddan was now the sole survivor of the family of Llyr. He was
homeless and landless. But Pryderi offered to give him a realm in Dyfed,
and his mother, Rhiannon, for a wife. The lady, her son explained, was
still not uncomely, and her conversation was pleasing. Manawyddan seems
to have found her attractive, while Rhiannon was not less taken with the
son of Llyr. They were wedded, and so great became the friendship of
Pryderi and Kicva, Manawyddan and Rhiannon, that the four were seldom
apart.

One day, after holding a feast at Narberth, they went up to the same
magic mound where Rhiannon had first met Pwyll. As they sat there,
thunder pealed, and immediately a thick mist sprang up, so that not one
of them could see the other. When it cleared, they found themselves
alone in an uninhabited country. Except for their own castle, the land
was desert and untilled, without sign of dwelling, man, or beast. One
touch of some unknown magic had utterly changed the face of Dyfed from a
rich realm to a wilderness.

Manawyddan and Pryderi, Rhiannon and Kicva traversed the country on all
sides, but found nothing except desolation and wild beasts. For two
years they lived in the open upon game and honey.

During the third year, they grew weary of this wild life, and decided to
go into Lloegyr[346], and support themselves by some handicraft.
Manawyddan could make saddles, and he made them so well that soon no one
in Hereford, where they had settled, would buy from any saddler but
himself. This aroused the enmity of all the other saddlers, and they
conspired to kill the strangers. So the four went to another city.

Here they made shields, and soon no one would purchase a shield unless
it had been made by Manawyddan and Pryderi. The shield-makers became
jealous, and again a move had to be made.

But they fared no better at the next town, where they practised the
craft of cordwainers, Manawyddan shaping the shoes and Pryderi stitching
them. So they went back to Dyfed again, and occupied themselves in
hunting.

One day, the hounds of Manawyddan and Pryderi roused a white wild boar.
They chased it till they came to a castle at a place where both the
huntsmen were certain that no castle had been before. Into this castle
went the boar, and the hounds after it. For some time, Manawyddan and
Pryderi waited in vain for their return. Pryderi then proposed that he
should go into the castle, and see what had become of them. Manawyddan
tried to dissuade him, declaring that whoever their enemy was who had
laid Dyfed waste had also caused the appearance of this castle. But
Pryderi insisted upon entering.

In the castle, he found neither the boar nor his hounds, nor any trace
of man or beast. There was nothing but a fountain in the centre of the
castle floor, and, on the brink of the fountain, a beautiful golden bowl
fastened to a marble slab by chains.

Pryderi was so pleased with the beauty of the bowl that he put out his
hands and took hold of it. Whereupon his hands stuck to the bowl, so
that he could not move from where he stood.

Manawyddan waited for him till the evening, and then returned to the
palace, and told Rhiannon. She, more daring than her husband, rebuked
him for cowardice, and went straight to the magic castle. In the court
she found Pryderi, his hands still glued to the bowl and his feet to the
slab. She tried to free him, but became fixed, herself, and, with a clap
of thunder and a fall of mist, the castle vanished with its two
prisoners.

Manawyddan was now left alone with Kicva, Pryderi's wife. He calmed her
fears, and assured her of his protection. But they had lost their dogs,
and could not hunt any more, so they set out together to Lloegyr, to
practise again Manawyddan's old trade of cordwainer. A second time, the
envious cordwainers conspired to kill them, so they were obliged to
return to Dyfed.

But Manawyddan took back a burden of wheat with him to Narberth, and
sowed three crofts, all of which sprang up abundantly.

When harvest time came, he went to look at his first croft, and found it
ripe. "I will reap this to-morrow," he said. But in the morning he found
nothing but the bare straw. Every ear had been taken away.

So he went to the next croft, which was also ripe. But, when he came to
cut it, he found it had been stripped like the first. Then he knew that
whoever had wasted Dyfed, and carried off Rhiannon and Pryderi, was also
at work upon his wheat.

The third croft was also ripe, and over this one he determined to keep
watch. In the evening he armed himself and waited. At midnight he heard
a great tumult, and, looking out, saw a host of mice coming. Each mouse
bit off an ear of wheat and ran off with it. He rushed among them, but
could only catch one, which was more sluggish than the rest. This one he
put into his glove, and took it back, and showed it to Kicva.

"To-morrow I will hang it," he said. "It is not a fit thing for a man of
your dignity to hang a mouse," she replied. "Nevertheless will I do so,"
said he. "Do so then," said Kicva.

The next morning, Manawyddan went to the magic mound, and set up two
forks on it, to make a gallows. He had just finished, when a man dressed
like a poor scholar came towards him, and greeted him.

"What are you doing, Lord?" he said.

"I am going to hang a thief," replied Manawyddan.

"What sort of a thief? I see an animal like a mouse in your hand, but a
man of rank like yours should not touch so mean a creature. Let it go
free."

"I caught it robbing me," replied Manawyddan, "and it shall die a
thief's death."

"I do not care to see a man like you doing such a thing," said the
scholar. "I will give you a pound to let it go."

"I will not let it go," replied Manawyddan, "nor will I sell it."

"As you will, Lord. It is nothing to me," returned the scholar. And he
went away.

Manawyddan laid a cross-bar along the forks. As he did so, another man
came by, a priest riding on a horse. He asked Manawyddan what he was
doing, and was told. "My lord," he said, "such a reptile is worth
nothing to buy, but rather than see you degrade yourself by touching it,
I will give you three pounds to let it go."

"I will take no money for it," replied Manawyddan. "It shall be hanged."

"Let it be hanged," said the priest, and went his way.

Manawyddan put the noose round the mouse's neck, and was just going to
draw it up, when he saw a bishop coming, with his whole retinue.

"Thy blessing, Lord Bishop," he said.

"Heaven's blessing upon you," said the bishop. "What are you doing?"

"I am hanging a thief," replied Manawyddan. "This mouse has robbed me."

"Since I happen to have come at its doom, I will ransom it," said the
bishop. "Here are seven pounds. Take them, and let it go."

"I will not let it go," replied Manawyddan.

"I will give you twenty-four pounds of ready money if you will let it
go," said the bishop.

"I would not, for as much again," replied Manawyddan.

"If you will not free it for that," said the bishop, "I will give you
all my horses and their baggage to let it go."

"I will not," replied Manawyddan.

"Then name your own price," said the bishop.

"That offer I accept," replied Manawyddan. "My price is that Rhiannon
and Pryderi be set free."

"They shall be set free," replied the bishop.

"Still I will not let the mouse go," said Manawyddan.

"What more do you ask?" exclaimed the bishop.

"That the charm be removed from Dyfed," replied Manawyddan.

"It shall be removed," promised the bishop. "So set the mouse free."

"I will not," said Manawyddan, "till I know who the mouse is."

"She is my wife," replied the bishop, "and I am called Llwyd, the son of
Kilcoed, and I cast the charm over Dyfed, and upon Rhiannon and Pryderi,
to avenge Gwawl son of Cld for the game of badger in the bag' which
was played on him by Pwyll, Head of Annwn. It was my household that came
in the guise of mice and took away your corn. But since my wife has been
caught, I will restore Rhiannon and Pryderi and take the charm off Dyfed
if you will let her go."

"I will not let her go," said Manawyddan, "until you have promised that
there shall be no charm put upon Dyfed again."

"I will promise that also," replied Llwyd. "So let her go."

"I will not let her go," said Manawyddan, "unless you swear to take no
revenge for this hereafter."

"You have done wisely to claim that," replied Llwyd. "Much trouble would
else have come upon your head because of this. Now I swear it. So set my
wife free."

"I will not," said Manawyddan, "until I see Rhiannon and Pryderi."

Then he saw them coming towards him; and they greeted one another.

"Now set my wife free," said the bishop.

"I will, gladly," replied Manawyddan. So he released the mouse, and
Llwyd struck her with a wand, and turned her into "a young woman, the
fairest ever seen".

And when Manawyddan looked round him, he saw Dyfed tilled and cultivated
again, as it had formerly been.

The powers of light had, this time, the victory. Little by little, they
increased their mastery over the dominion of darkness, until we find the
survivors of the families of Llyr and Pwyll mere vassals of Arthur.

-----

Footnote 345:

  Retold from Lady Guest's translation of the Mabinogi of _Manawyddan,
  the Son of Llyr_.

Footnote 346:

  Saxon Britain-England.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER XX

                  THE VICTORIES OF LIGHT OVER DARKNESS


The powers of light were, however, by no means invariably successful in
their struggles with the powers of darkness. Even Gwydion son of Dn had
to serve his apprenticeship to misfortune. Assailing Caer
Sidi-Hades[347] under one of its many titles,-he was caught by Pwyll and
Pryderi, and endured a long imprisonment.[348] The sufferings he
underwent made him a bard-an ancient Celtic idea which one can still see
surviving in the popular tradition that whoever dares to spend a night
alone either upon the chair of the Giant Idris (the summit of Cader
Idris, in Merionethshire), or under the haunted Black Stone of Arddu,
upon the Llanberis side of Snowdon, will be found in the morning either
inspired or mad.[349] How he escaped we are not told; but the episode
does not seem to have quenched his ardour against the natural enemies of
his kind.

Helped by his brother, Amaethon, god of agriculture, and his son, Lleu,
he fought the Battle of Godeu, or "the Trees", an exploit which is not
the least curious of Celtic myths. It is known also as the Battle of
Achren, or Ochren, a name for Hades of unknown meaning, but appearing
again in the remarkable Welsh poem which describes the "Spoiling of
Annwn" by Arthur. The King of Achren was Arawn; and he was helped by
Brn, who apparently had not then made his fatal journey to Ireland. The
war was made to secure three boons for man-the dog, the deer, and the
lapwing, all of them creatures for some reason sacred to the gods of the
nether world.

Gwydion was this time not alone, as he apparently was when he made his
first unfortunate reconnaissance of Hades. Besides his brother and his
son, he had an army which he raised for the purpose. For a leader of
Gwydion's magical attainments there was no need of standing troops. He
could call battalions into being with a charm, and dismiss them when
they were no longer needed. The name of the battle shows what he did on
this occasion; and the bard Taliesin adds his testimony:

      "I have been in the battle of Godeu, with Lleu and Gwydion,
       They changed the forms of the elementary trees and sedges".

In a poem devoted to it[350] he describes in detail what happened. The
trees and grasses, he tells us, hurried to the fight: the alders led the
van, but the willows and the quickens came late, and the birch, though
courageous, took long in arraying himself; the elm stood firm in the
centre of the battle, and would not yield a foot; heaven and earth
trembled before the advance of the oak-tree, that stout door-keeper
against an enemy; the heroic holly and the hawthorn defended themselves
with their spikes; the heather kept off the enemy on every side, and the
broom was well to the front, but the fern was plundered, and the furze
did not do well; the stout, lofty pine, the intruding pear-tree, the
gloomy ash, the bashful chestnut-tree, the prosperous beech, the
long-enduring poplar, the scarce plum-tree, the shelter-seeking privet
and woodbine, the wild, foreign laburnum; "the bean, bearing in its
shade an army of phantoms"; rose-bush, raspberry, ivy, cherry-tree, and
medlar-all took their parts.

In the ranks of Hades there were equally strange fighters. We are told
of a hundred-headed beast, carrying a formidable battalion under the
root of its tongue and another in the back of its head; there was a
gaping black toad with a hundred claws; and a crested snake of many
colours, within whose flesh a hundred souls were tormented for their
sins-in fact, it would need a Dor or a Dante to do justice to this
weird battle between the arrayed magics of heaven and hell.

It was magic that decided its fate. There was a fighter in the ranks of
Hades who could not be overcome unless his antagonist guessed his name-a
peculiarity of the terrene gods, remarks Professor Rhys,[351] which has
been preserved in our popular fairy tales. Gwydion guessed the name, and
sang these two verses:-

          "Sure-hoofed is my steed impelled by the spur;
           The high sprigs of alder are on thy shield;
           _Brn_ art thou called, of the glittering branches!

          "Sure-hoofed is my steed in the day of battle:
           The high sprigs of alder are on thy hand:
           _Brn_ ... by the branch thou bearest
           Has Amaethon the Good prevailed!"[352]

Thus the power of the dark gods was broken, and the sons of Dn retained
for the use of men the deer, the dog, and the lapwing, stolen from that
underworld, whence all good gifts came.

It was always to obtain some practical benefit that the gods of light
fought against the gods of darkness. The last and greatest of Gwydion's
raids upon Hades was undertaken to procure-pork![353]

Gwydion had heard that there had come to Dyfed some strange beasts, such
as had never been seen before. They were called "pigs" or "swine", and
Arawn, King of Annwn, had sent them as a gift to Pryderi son of Pwyll.
They were small animals, and their flesh was said to be better than the
flesh of oxen. He thought it would be a good thing to get them, either
by force or fraud, from the dark powers. Mth son of Mthonwy, who ruled
the children of Dn from his Olympus of Caer Dathyl[354], gave his
consent, and Gwydion set off, with eleven others, to Pryderi's
palace[355]. They disguised themselves as bards, so as to be received by
Pryderi, and Gwydion, who was "the best teller of tales in the world",
entertained the Prince of Dyfed and his court more than they had ever
been entertained by any story-teller before. Then he asked Pryderi to
grant him a boon-the animals which had come from Annwn. But Pryderi had
pledged his word to Arawn that he would neither sell nor give away any
of the new creatures until they had increased to double their number,
and he told the disguised Gwydion so.

"Lord," said Gwydion, "I can set you free from your promise. Neither
give me the swine at once, nor yet refuse them to me altogether, and
to-morrow I will show you how."

He went to the lodging Pryderi had assigned him, and began to work his
charms and illusions. Out of fungus he made twelve gilded shields, and
twelve horses with gold harness, and twelve black greyhounds with white
breasts, each wearing a golden collar and leash. And these he showed to
Pryderi.

"Lord," said he, "there is a release from the word you spoke last
evening concerning the swine-that you may neither give them nor sell
them. You may exchange them for something which is better. I will give
you these twelve horses with their gold harness, and these twelve
greyhounds with their gold collars and leashes, and these twelve gilded
shields for them."

Pryderi took counsel with his men, and agreed to the bargain. So Gwydion
and his followers took the swine and went away with them, hurrying as
fast as they could, for Gwydion knew that the illusion would not last
longer than a day. The memory of their journey was long kept up; every
place where they rested between Dyfed and Caer Dathyl is remembered by a
name connecting it with pigs. There is a Mochdrev ("Swine's Town") in
each of the three counties of Cardiganshire, Montgomeryshire, and
Denbighshire, and a Castell y Moch ("Swine's Castle") near Mochnant
("Swine's Brook"), which runs through part of the two latter counties.
They shut up the pigs in safety, and then assembled all Mth's army; for
the horses and hounds and shields had returned to fungus, and Pryderi,
who guessed Gwydion's part in it, was coming northward in hot haste.

There were two battles-one at Maenor Penardd, near Conway, and the other
at Maenor Alun, now called Coed Helen, near Caernarvon. Beaten in both,
Pryderi fell back upon Nant Call, about nine miles from Caernarvon. Here
he was again defeated with great slaughter, and sent hostages, asking
for peace and a safe retreat.

This was granted by Mth; but, none the less, the army of the sons of
Dn insisted on following the retreating host, and harassing it. So
Pryderi sent a complaint to Mth, demanding that, if there must still be
war, Gwydion, who had caused all the trouble, should fight with him in
single combat.

Gwydion agreed, and the champions of light and darkness met face to
face. But Pryderi was the waning power, and he fell before the strength
and magic of Gwydion. "And at Maen Tyriawc, above Melenryd, was he
buried, and there is his grave", says the Mabinogi, though the ancient
Welsh poem, called the "Verses of the Graves of the Warriors"[356],
assigns him a different resting-place.[357]

This decisive victory over Hades and its kings was the end of the
struggle, until it was renewed, with still more complete success, by one
greater than Gwydion-the invincible Arthur.

-----

Footnote 347:

  Or the Celtic Elysium, "a mythical country beneath the waves of the
  sea".

Footnote 348:

  See the _Spoiling of Annwn_, quoted in chap. XXI-"The Mythological
  Coming of Arthur'".

Footnote 349:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 250-251.

Footnote 350:

  _Book of Taliesin VIII_, Vol. I, p. 276, of Skene. I have followed
  Skene's translation, with the especial exception of the curious line
  referring to the bean, so translated in D. W. Nash's _Taliesin_. If a
  correct rendering of the Welsh original, it offers an interesting
  parallel to certain superstitions of the Greeks concerning this
  vegetable.

Footnote 351:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, note to p. 245.

Footnote 352:

  Lady Guest's translation in her notes to _Kulhwch and Olwen_.

Footnote 353:

  The following episode is retold from Lady Guest's translation of the
  Mabinogi of _Mth, Son of Mathonwy_.

Footnote 354:

  Now called Pen y Gaer. It is on the summit of a hill half-way between
  Llanrwst and Conway, and about a mile from the station of Llanbedr.

Footnote 355:

  Said to have been at Rhuddlan Teivi, which is, perhaps, Glan Teivy,
  near Cardigan Bridge.

Footnote 356:

  Poem XIX in the _Black Book of Caermarthen_, Vol. I, p. 309, of Skene.

Footnote 357:

                "In Aber Gwenoli is the grave of Pryderi,
                Where the waves beat against the land."

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XXI

                  THE MYTHOLOGICAL "COMING OF ARTHUR"


The "Coming of Arthur", his sudden rise into prominence, is one of the
many problems of the Celtic mythology. He is not mentioned in any of the
Four Branches of the Mabinogi, which deal with the races of British gods
equivalent to the Gaelic Tuatha D Danann. The earliest references to
him in Welsh literature seem to treat him as merely a warrior-chieftain,
no better, if no worse, than several others, such as "Geraint, a
tributary prince of Devon", immortalized both by the bards[358] and by
Tennyson. Then, following upon this, we find him lifted to the
extraordinary position of a king of gods, to whom the old divine
families of Dn, of Llyr, and of Pwyll pay unquestioned homage. Triads
tell us that Lludd-the Zeus of the older Pantheon-was one of Arthur's
"Three Chief War-Knights", and Arawn, King of Hades, one of his "Three
Chief Counselling Knights". In the story called the "Dream of Rhonabwy",
in the Red Book of Hergest, he is shown as a leader to whom are subject
those we know to have been of divine race-sons of Nudd, of Llyr, of
Brn, of Govannan, and of Arianrod. In another "Red Book" tale, that of
"Kulhwch and Olwen", even greater gods are his vassals. Amaethon son of
Dn, ploughs for him, and Govannan son of Dn, rids the iron, while two
other sons of Beli, Nynniaw and Peibaw, "turned into oxen on account of
their sins", toil at the yoke, that a mountain may be cleared and tilled
and the harvest reaped in one day. He assembles his champions to seek
the "treasures of Britain"; and Manawyddan son of Llyr, Gwyn son of
Nudd, and Pryderi son of Pwyll rally round him at his call.

The most probable, and only adequate explanation, is given by Professor
Rhys, who considers that the fames of two separate Arthurs have been
accidentally confused, to the exceeding renown of a composite,
half-real, half-mythical personage into whom the two blended.[359] One
of these was a divine Arthur, a god more or less widely worshipped in
the Celtic world-the same, no doubt, whom an _ex voto_ inscription found
in south-eastern France calls _Mercurius Artaius_.[360] The other was a
human Arthur, who held among the Britons the post which, under Roman
domination, had been called _Comes Britanni_. This "Count of Britain"
was the supreme military authority; he had a roving commission to defend
the country against foreign invasion; and under his orders were two
slightly subordinate officers, the _Dux Britanniarum_ (Duke of the
Britains), who had charge of the northern wall, and the _Comes Littoris
Saxonici_ (Count of the Saxon Shore), who guarded the south-eastern
coasts. The Britons, after the departure of the Romans, long kept intact
the organization their conquerors had built up; and it seems reasonable
to believe that this post of leader in war was the same which early
Welsh literature describes as that of "emperor", a title given to Arthur
alone among the British heroes.[361] The fame of Arthur the Emperor
blended with that of Arthur the God, so that it became conterminous with
the area over which we have traced Brythonic settlement in Great
Britain.[362] Hence the many disputes, ably, if unprofitably, conducted,
over "Arthurian localities" and the sites of such cities as Camelot, and
of Arthur's twelve great battles. Historical elements doubtless coloured
the tales of Arthur and his companions, but they are none the less as
essentially mythic as those told of their Gaelic analogues-the Red
Branch Heroes of Ulster and the Fenians.

Of those two cycles, it is with the latter that the Arthurian legend
shows most affinity.[363] Arthur's position as supreme war-leader of
Britain curiously parallels that of Finn's as general of a "native Irish
militia". His "Round Table" of warriors also reminds one of Finn's
Fenians sworn to adventure. Both alike battle with human and superhuman
foes. Both alike harry Europe, even to the walls of Rome. The love-story
of Arthur, his wife Gwynhwyvar (Guinevere), and his nephew Medrawt
(Mordred), resembles in several ways that of Finn, his wife Grainne, and
his nephew Diarmait. In the stories of the last battles of Arthur and of
the Fenians, the essence of the kindred myth still subsists, though the
actual exponents of it slightly differ. At the fight of Camlan, it was
Arthur and Medrawt themselves who fought the final duel. But in the last
stand of the Fenians at Gabhra, the original protagonists have given
place to their descendants and representatives. Both Finn and Cormac
were already dead. It is Oscar, Finn's grandson, and Cairbr, Cormac's
son, who fight and slay each other. And again, just as Arthur was
thought by many not to have really died, but to have passed to "the
island valley of Avilion", so a Scottish legend tells us how, ages after
the Fenians, a man, landing by chance upon a mysterious western island,
met and spoke with Finn mac Coul. Even the alternative legend, which
makes Arthur and his warriors wait under the earth in a magic sleep for
the return of their triumph, is also told of the Fenians.

But these parallels, though they illustrate Arthur's pre-eminence, do
not show his real place among the gods. To determine this, we must
examine the ranks of the older dynasties carefully, to see if any are
missing whose attributes this new-comer may have inherited. We find
Lludd and Gwyn, Arawn, Pryderi, and Manawyddan side by side with him
under their own names. Among the children of Dn are Amaethon and
Govannan. But here the list stops, with a notable omission. There is no
mention, in later myth, of Gwydion. That greatest of the sons of Dn has
fallen out, and vanished without a sign.

Singularly enough, too, the same stories that were once told of Gwydion
are now attached to the name of Arthur. So that we may assume, with
Professor Rhys, that Arthur, the prominent god of a new Pantheon, has
taken the place of Gwydion in the old.[364] A comparison of
Gwydion-myths and Arthur-myths shows an almost exact correspondence in
everything but name.

Like Gwydion, Arthur is the exponent of culture and of arts. Therefore
we see him carrying on the same war against the underworld for wealth
and wisdom that Gwydion and the sons of Dn waged against the sons of
Llyr, the Sea, and of Pwyll, the Head of Hades.

Like Gwydion, too, Arthur suffered early reverses. He failed, indeed,
even where his prototype had succeeded. Gwydion, we know from the
Mabinogi of Mth, successfully stole Pryderi's pigs, but Arthur was
utterly baffled in his attempt to capture the swine of a similar prince
of the underworld, called March son of Meirchion.[365] Also as with
Gwydion, his earliest reconnaissance of Hades was disastrous, and led to
his capture and imprisonment. Manawyddan son of Llyr, confined him in
the mysterious and gruesome bone-fortress of Oeth and Anoeth, and there
he languished for three days and three nights before a rescuer came in
the person of Goreu, his cousin.[366] But, in the end, he triumphed. A
Welsh poem, ascribed to the bard Taliesin, relates, under the title "The
Spoiling of Annwn",[367] an expedition of Arthur and his followers into
the very heart of that country, from which he appears to have returned
(for the verses are somewhat obscure) with the loss of almost all his
men, but in possession of the object of his quest-the magic cauldron of
inspiration and poetry.

Taliesin tells the story as an eye-witness. He may well have done so;
for it was his boast that from the creation of the world he had allowed
himself to miss no event of importance. He was in Heaven, he tells
us,[368] when Lucifer fell, and in the Court of Dn before Gwydion was
born; he had been among the constellations both with Mary Magdalene and
with the pagan goddess Arianrod; he carried a banner before Alexander,
and was chief director of the building of the Tower of Babel; he saw the
fall of Troy and the founding of Rome; he was with Noah in the Ark, and
he witnessed the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; and he was present
both at the Manger of Bethlehem and at the Cross of Calvary. But,
unfortunately, Taliesin, as a credible personage, rests under exactly
the same disabilities as Arthur himself. It is not denied by scholars
that there was a real Taliesin, a sixth-century bard to whom were
attributed, and who may have actually composed, some of the poems in the
Book of Taliesin.[369] But there was also another Taliesin, whom, as a
mythical poet of the British Celts, Professor Rhys is inclined to equate
with the Gaelic Ossian.[370] The traditions of the two mingled, endowing
the historic Taliesin with the god-like attributes of his predecessor,
and clothing the mythical Taliesin with some of the actuality of his
successor.[371]

It is regrettable that our bard did not at times sing a little less
incoherently, for his poem contains the fullest description that has
come down to us of the other world as the Britons conceived it.
Apparently the numerous names, all different and some now
untranslatable, refer to the same place, and they must be collated to
form a right idea of what Annwn was like. With the exception of an
obviously spurious last verse, here omitted, the poem is magnificently
pagan, and quite a storehouse of British mythology[372].

 "I will praise the Sovereign, supreme Lord of the land,
  Who hath extended his dominion over the shore of the world.
  Stout was the prison of Gweir[373], in Caer Sidi,
  Through the spite of Pwyll and Pryderi:
  No one before him went into it.
  The heavy blue chain firmly held the youth,
  And before the spoils of Annwn woefully he sang,
  And thenceforth till doom he shall remain a bard.
  Thrice enough to fill Prydwen[374] we went into it;
  Except seven, none returned from Caer Sidi[375].

 "Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in song
  In Caer Pedryvan[376], four times revolving?
  The first word from the cauldron, when was it spoken?
  By the breath of nine maidens it was gently warmed.
  Is it not the cauldron of the chief of Annwn? What is its fashion?
  A rim of pearls is round its edge.
  It will not cook the food of a coward or one forsworn.
  A sword flashing bright will be raised to him,
  And left in the hand of Lleminawg.
  And before the door of the gate of Uffern[377] the lamp was burning.
  When we went with Arthur-a splendid labour!-
  Except seven, none returned from Caer Vedwyd[378].

 "Am I not a candidate for fame, to be heard in song
  In Caer Pedryvan, in the Isle of the Strong Door,
  Where twilight and pitchy darkness meet together,
  And bright wine is the drink of the host?
  Thrice enough to fill Prydwen we went on the sea.
  Except seven, none returned from Caer Rigor[379].

 "I will not allow much praise to the leaders of literature.
  Beyond Caer Wydyr[380] they saw not the prowess of Arthur;
  Three-score hundreds stood on the walls;
  It was hard to converse with their watchman.
  Thrice enough to fill Prydwen we went with Arthur;
  Except seven, none returned from Caer Golud[381].

 "I will not allow much praise to the spiritless.
  They know not on what day, or who caused it,
  Or in what hour of the serene day Cwy was born,
  Or who caused that he should not go to the dales of Devwy.
  They know not the brindled ox with the broad head-band,
  Whose yoke is seven-score handbreadths.
  When we went with Arthur, of mournful memory,
  Except seven, none returned from Caer Vandwy[382].

 "I will not allow much praise to those of drooping courage.
  They know not on what day the chief arose,
  Nor in what hour of the serene day the owner was born,
  Nor what animal they keep, with its head of silver.
  When we went with Arthur, of anxious striving,
  Except seven, none returned from Caer Ochren[383]".

Many of the allusions of this poem will perhaps never be explained. We
know no better than the "leaders of literature" whom the vainglorious
Taliesin taunted with their ignorance and lack of spirit in what hour
Cwy was born, or even who he was, much less who prevented him from going
to the dales of Devwy, wherever they may have been. We are in the dark
as much as they were with regard to the significance of the brindled ox
with the broad head-band, and of the other animal with the silver
head.[384] But the earlier portion of the poem is, fortunately, clearer,
and it gives glimpses of a grandeur of savage imagination. The
strong-doored, foursquare fortress of glass, manned by its dumb, ghostly
sentinels, spun round in never-ceasing revolution, so that few could
find its entrance; it was pitch-dark save for the twilight made by the
lamp burning before its circling gate; feasting went on there, and
revelry, and in its centre, choicest of its many riches, was the
pearl-rimmed cauldron of poetry and inspiration, kept bubbling by the
breaths of nine British pythonesses, so that it might give forth its
oracles. To this scanty information we may add a few lines, also by
Taliesin, and contained in a poem called "A Song Concerning the Sons of
Llyr ab Brochwel Powys":-

            "Perfect is my chair in Caer Sidi:
             Plague and age hurt not him who's in it-
             They know, Manawyddan and Pryderi.
             Three organs round a fire sing before it,
             And about its points are ocean's streams
             And the abundant well above it-
             Sweeter than white wine the drink in it."[385]

Little is, however, added by it to our knowledge. It reminds us that
Annwn was surrounded by the sea-"the heavy blue chain" which held Gweir
so firmly;-it informs us that the "bright wine" which was "the drink of
the host" was kept in a well; it adds to the revelry the singing of the
three organs; it makes a point that its inhabitants were freed from age
and death; and, last of all, it shows us, as we might have expected, the
ubiquitous Taliesin as a privileged resident of this delightful region.
We have two clues as to where the country may have been situated. Lundy
Island, off the coast of Devonshire, was anciently called _Ynys Wair_,
the "Island of Gweir", or Gwydion. The Welsh translation of the _Seint
Greal_, an Anglo-Norman romance embodying much of the old mythology,
locates its "Turning Castle"-evidently the same as Caer Sidi-in the
district around and comprising Puffin Island off the coast of
Anglesey.[386] But these are slender threads by which to tether to firm
ground a realm of the imagination.

With Gwydion, too, have disappeared the whole of the characters
connected with him in that portion of the Mabinogi of Mth, Son of
Mathonwy, which recounts the myth of the birth of the sun-god. Neither
Mth himself, nor Lleu Llaw Gyffes, nor Dylan, nor their mother,
Arianrod, play any more part; they have vanished as completely as
Gwydion. But the essence of the myth of which they were the figures
remains intact. Gwydion was the father by his sister Arianrod, wife of a
waning heaven-god called Nwyvre (Space), of twin sons, Lleu, a god of
light, and Dylan, a god of darkness; and we find this same story woven
into the very innermost texture of the legend of Arthur.[387] The new
Arianrod, though called "Morgawse" by Sir Thomas Malory[388], and "Anna"
by Geoffrey of Monmouth[389], is known to earlier Welsh myth as
"Gwyar"[390]. She was the sister of Arthur and the wife of the sky-god,
Lludd, and her name, which means "shed blood" or "gore", reminds us of
the relationship of the Morrg, the war-goddess of the Gaels, to the
heaven-god Nuada[391]. The new Lleu Llaw Gyffes is called Gwalchmei,
that is, the "Falcon of May"[392], and the new Dylan is Medrawt, at once
Arthur's son and Gwalchmei's brother, and the bitterest enemy of
both[393].

Besides these "old friends with new faces", Arthur brings with him into
prominence a fresh Pantheon, most of whom also replace the older gods of
the heavens and earth and the regions under the earth. The Zeus of
Arthur's cycle is called Myrddin, who passed into the Norman-French
romances as "Merlin". All the myths told of him bear witness to his high
estate. The first name of Britain, before it was inhabited, was, we
learn from a triad, _Clas Myrddin_, that is, "Myrddin's Enclosure".[394]
He is given a wife whose attributes recall those of the consorts of
Nuada and Lludd. She is described as the only daughter of Coel-the
British name of the Gaulish _Camulus_, a god of war and the sky-and was
called Elen Lwyddawg, that is, "Elen, Leader of Hosts". Her memory is
still preserved in Wales in connection with ancient roadways; such names
as _Ffordd Elen_ ("Elen's Road") and _Sarn Elen_ ("Elen's Causeway")
seem to show that the paths on which armies marched were ascribed or
dedicated to her.[395] As Myrddin's wife, she is credited with having
founded the town of Carmarthen (_Caer Myrddin_), as well as the "highest
fortress in Arvon", which must have been the site near Beddgelert still
called _Dinas Emrys_, the "Town of Emrys", one of Myrddin's epithets or
names.[396]

Professor Rhys is inclined to credit Myrddin, or, rather, the British
Zeus under whatever name, with having been the god especially worshipped
at Stonehenge.[397] Certainly this impressive temple, ever unroofed and
open to the sun and wind and rain of heaven, would seem peculiarly
appropriate to a British supreme god of light and sky. Neither are we
quite without documentary evidence which will allow us to connect it
with him. Geoffrey of Monmouth[398], whose historical fictions usually
conceal mythological facts, relates that the stones which compose it
were erected by Merlin. Before that, they had stood in Ireland, upon a
hill which Geoffrey calls "Mount Killaraus", and which can be identified
as the same spot known to Irish legend as the "Hill of Uisnech", and,
still earlier, connected with Balor. According to British tradition, the
primeval giants who first colonized Ireland had brought them from their
original home on "the farthest coast of Africa", on account of their
miraculous virtues; for any water in which they were bathed became a
sovereign remedy either for sickness or for wounds. By the order of
Aurelius, a half-real, half-mythical king of Britain, Merlin brought
them thence to England, to be set up on Salisbury Plain as a monument to
the British chieftains treacherously slain by Hengist and his Saxons.
With this scrap of native information about Stonehenge we may compare
the only other piece we have-the account of the classic Diodorus, who
called it a temple of Apollo.[399] At first, these two statements seem
to conflict. But it is far from unlikely that the earlier Celtic
settlers in Britain made little or no religious distinction between sky
and sun. The sun-god, as a separate personage, seems to have been the
conception of a comparatively late age. Celtic mythology allows us to be
present, as it were, at the births both of the Gaelic Lugh Lamhfada and
the British Lleu Llaw Gyffes.

Even the well-known story of Myrddin's, or Merlin's final imprisonment
in a tomb of airy enchantment-"a tour withouten walles, or withoute eny
closure"-reads marvellously like a myth of the sun "with all his fires
and travelling glories round him".[400] Encircled, shielded, and made
splendid by his atmosphere of living light, the Lord of Heaven moves
slowly towards the west, to disappear at last into the sea (as one local
version of the myth puts it), or on to a far-off island (as another
says), or into a dark forest (the choice of a third).[401] When the myth
became finally fixed, it was Bardsey Island, off the extreme westernmost
point of Caernarvonshire, that was selected as his last abode. Into it
he went with nine attendant bards, taking with him the "Thirteen
Treasures of Britain", thenceforth lost to men. Bardsey Island no doubt
derives its name from this story; and what is probably an allusion to it
is found in a first-century Greek writer called Plutarch, who describes
a grammarian called Demetrius as having visited Britain, and brought
home an account of his travels. He mentioned several uninhabited and
sacred islands off our coasts which he said were named after gods and
heroes, but there was one especially in which Cronos was imprisoned with
his attendant deities, and Briareus keeping watch over him as he slept;
"for sleep was the bond forged for him".[402] Doubtless this
disinherited deity, whom the Greek, after his fashion, called "Cronos",
was the British heaven- and sun-god, after he had descended into the
prison of the west.

Among other new-comers is Kai, who, as Sir Kay the Seneschal, fills so
large a part in the later romances. Purged of his worst offences, and
reduced to a surly butler to Arthur, he is but a shadow of the earlier
Kai who murdered Arthur's son Llacheu[403], and can only be acquitted,
through the obscurity of the poem that relates the incident, of having
also carried off, or having tried to carry off, Arthur's wife,
Gwynhwyvar.[404] He is thought to have been a personification of
fire,[405] upon the strength of a description given of him in the
mythical romance of "Kulhwch and Olwen". "Very subtle", it says, "was
Kai. When it pleased him he could render himself as tall as the highest
tree in the forest. And he had another peculiarity-so great was the heat
of his nature, that, when it rained hardest, whatever he carried
remained dry for a handbreadth above and a handbreadth below his hand;
and when his companions were coldest, it was to them as fuel with which
to light their fire."

Another personage who owes his prominence in the Arthurian story to his
importance in Celtic myth was March son of Meirchion, whose swine Arthur
attempted to steal, as Gwydion had done those of Pryderi. In the
romances, he has become the cowardly and treacherous Mark, king,
according to some stories, of Cornwall, but according to others, of the
whole of Britain, and known to all as the husband of the Fair Isoult,
and the uncle of Sir Tristrem. But as a deformed deity of the
underworld[406] he can be found in Gaelic as well as in British myth. He
cannot be considered as originally different from Morc, a king of the
Fomors at the time when from their Glass Castle they so fatally
oppressed the Children of Nemed.[407] The Fomors were distinguished by
their animal features, and March had the same peculiarity.[408] When Sir
Thomas Malory relates how, to please Arthur and Sir Launcelot, Sir
Dinadan made a song about Mark, "which was the worst lay that ever
harper sang with harp or any other instruments,"[409] he does not tell
us wherein the sting of the lampoon lay. It no doubt reminded King Mark
of the unpleasant fact that he had-not like his Phrygian counterpart,
ass's but-horse's ears. He was, in fact, a Celtic Midas, a distinction
which he shared with one of the mythical kings of early Ireland.[410]

Neither can we pass over Urien, a deity of the underworld akin to, or
perhaps the same as, Brn.[411] Like that son of Llyr, he was at once a
god of battle and of minstrelsy;[412] he was adored by the bards as
their patron;[413] his badge was the raven (_bran_, in Welsh);[414]
while, to make his identification complete, there is an extant poem
which tells how Urien, wounded, ordered his own head to be cut off by
his attendants.[415] His wife was Modron,[416] known as the mother of
Mabon, the sun-god to whom inscriptions exist as _Maponos_. Another of
the children of Urien and Modron is Owain, which was perhaps only
another name for Mabon.[417] Taliesin calls him "chief of the glittering
west",[418] and he is as certainly a sun-god as his father Urien, "lord
of the evening",[419] was a ruler of the dark underworld.

It is by reason of the pre-eminence of Arthur that we find gathered
round him so many gods, all probably various tribal personifications of
the same few mythological ideas. The Celts, both of the Gaelic and the
British branches, were split up into numerous petty tribes, each with
its own local deities embodying the same essential conceptions under
different names. There was the god of the underworld, gigantic in
figure, patron alike of warrior and minstrel, teacher of the arts of
eloquence and literature, and owner of boundless wealth, whom some of
the British tribes worshipped as Brn, others as Urien, others as Pwyll,
or March, or Mth, or Arawn, or Ogyrvran. There was the lord of an
elysium-Hades in its aspect of a paradise of the departed rather than of
the primeval subterranean realm where all thing's originated-whom the
Britons of Wales called Gwyn, or Gwynwas; the Britons of Cornwall,
Melwas; and the Britons of Somerset, Avallon, or Avallach. Under this
last title, his realm is called _Ynys Avallon_, "Avallon's Island", or,
as we know the word, Avilion. It was said to be in the "Land of Summer",
which, in the earliest myth, signified Hades; and it was only in later
days that the mystic Isle of Avilion became fixed to earth as
Glastonbury, and the Elysian "Land of Summer" as Somerset.[420] There
was a mighty ruler of heaven, a "god of battles", worshipped on high
places, in whose hands was "the stern arbitrament of war"; some knew him
as Lludd, others as Myrddin, or as Emrys. There was a gentler deity,
friendly to man, to help whom he fought or cajoled the powers of the
underworld; Gwydion he was called, and Arthur. Last, perhaps, to be
imagined in concrete shape, there was a long-armed, sharp-speared
sun-god who aided the culture-god in his work, and was known as Lleu, or
Gwalchmei, or Mabon, or Owain, or Peredur, and no doubt by many another
name; and with him is usually found a brother representing not light,
but darkness. This expression of a single idea by different names may be
also observed in Gaelic myth, though not quite so clearly. In the
hurtling of clan against clan, many such divinities perished altogether
out of memory, or survived only as names, to make up, in Ireland, the
vast, shadowy population claiming to be Tuatha D Danann, and, in
Britain, the long list of Arthur's followers. Others-gods of stronger
communities-would increase their fame as their worshippers increased
their territory, until, as happened in Greece, the chief deities of many
tribes came together to form a national Pantheon.

We have already tried to explain the "Coming of Arthur" historically.
Mythologically, he came, as, according to Celtic ideas, all things came
originally, from the underworld. His father is called Uther
Pendragon.[421] But Uther Pendragon is (for the word "dragon" is not
part of the name, but a title signifying "war-leader") _Uther Ben_, that
is, Brn, under his name of the "Wonderful Head",[422] so that, in spite
of the legend which describes Arthur as having disinterred Brn's head
on Tower Hill, where it watched against invasion, because he thought it
beneath his dignity to keep Britain in any other way than by
valour,[423] we must recognize the King of Hades as his father. This
being so, it would only be natural that he should take a wife from the
same eternal country, and we need not be surprised to find in
Gwynhwyvar's father, Ogyrvran, a personage corresponding in all respects
to the Celtic conception of the ruler of the underworld. He was of
gigantic size;[424] he was the owner of a cauldron out of which three
Muses had been born;[425] and he was the patron of the bards,[426] who
deemed him to have been the originator of their art. More than this, his
very name, analysed into its original _ocur vran_, means the evil
_bran_, or raven, the bird of death.[427]

But Welsh tradition credits Arthur with three wives, each of them called
Gwynhwyvar. This peculiar arrangement is probably due to the Celtic love
of triads; and one may compare them with the three Etains who pass
through the mythico-heroic story of Eochaid Airem, Etain, and Mider. Of
these three Gwynhwyvars,[428] besides the Gwynhwyvar, daughter of
Ogyrvran, one was the daughter of Gwyrd Gwent, of whom we know nothing
but the name, and the other of Gwyrthur ap Greidawl, the same "Victor
son of Scorcher" with whom Gwyn son of Nudd, fought, in earlier myth,
perpetual battle for the possession of Creudylad, daughter of the
sky-god Lludd. This same eternal strife between the powers of light and
darkness for the possession of a symbolical damsel is waged again in the
Arthurian cycle; but it is no longer for Creudylad that Gwyn contends,
but for Gwynhwyvar, and no longer with Gwyrthur, but with Arthur. It
would seem to have been a Cornish form of the myth; for the dark god is
called "Melwas", and not "Gwynwas", or "Gwyn", his name in Welsh.[429]
Melwas lay in ambush for a whole year, and finally succeeded in carrying
off Gwynhwyvar to his palace in Avilion. But Arthur pursued, and
besieged that stronghold, just as Eochaid Airem had, in the Gaelic
version of the universal story, mined and sapped at Mider's _sdh_ of
Bri Leith.[430] Mythology, as well as history, repeats itself; and
Melwas was obliged to restore Gwynhwyvar to her rightful lord.

It is not Melwas, however, that in the best-known versions of the story
contends with Arthur for the love of Gwynhwyvar. The most widespread
early tradition makes Arthur's rival his nephew Medrawt. Here Professor
Rhys traces a striking parallel between the British legend of Arthur,
Gwynhwyvar, and Medrawt, and the Gaelic story of Airem, Etain, and
Mider.[431] The two myths are practically counterparts; for the names of
all the three pairs agree in their essential meaning. "Airem", like
"Arthur", signifies the "Ploughman", the divine institutor of
agriculture; "Etain", the "Shining One", is a fit parallel to
"Gwynhwyvar", the "White Apparition"; while "Mider" and "Medrawt" both
come from the same root, a word meaning "to hit", either literally, or
else metaphorically, with the mind, in the sense of coming to a
decision. To attempt to explain this myth is to raise the vexed question
of the meaning of mythology. Is it day and dark that strive for dawn, or
summer and winter for the lovely spring, or does it shadow forth the
rescue of the grain that makes man's life from the devouring underworld
by the farmer's wit? When this can be finally resolved, a multitude of
Celtic myths will be explained. Everywhere arise the same combatants for
the stolen bride; one has the attributes of light, the other is a
champion of darkness.

Even in Sir Thomas Malory's version of the Arthurian story, taken by him
from French romances far removed from the original tradition, we find
the myth subsisting. Medrawt's original place as the lover of Arthur's
queen had been taken in the romances by Sir Launcelot, who, if he was
not some now undiscoverable Celtic god,[432] must have been an invention
of the Norman adapters. But the story which makes Medrawt Arthur's rival
has been preserved in the account of how Sir Mordred would have wedded
Guinevere by force, as part of the rebellion which he made against his
king and uncle.[433] This strife was Celtic myth long before it became
part of the pseudo-history of early Britain. The triads[434] tell us how
Arthur and Medrawt raided each other's courts during the owner's
absence. Medrawt went to Kelli Wic, in Cornwall, ate and drank
everything he could find there, and insulted Queen Gwynhwyvar, in
revenge for which Arthur went to Medrawt's court and killed man and
beast. Their struggle only ended with the Battle of Camlan; and that
mythical combat, which chroniclers have striven to make historical, is
full of legendary detail. Tradition tells how Arthur and his antagonist
shared their forces three times during the fight, which caused it to be
known as one of the "Three Frivolous Battles of Britain", the idea of
doing so being one of "Britain's Three Criminal Resolutions". Four alone
survived the fray: one, because he was so ugly that all shrank from him,
believing him to be a devil; another, whom no one touched because he was
so beautiful that they took him for an angel; a third, whose great
strength no one could resist; and Arthur himself, who, after revenging
the death of Gwalchmei upon Medrawt, went to the island of Avilion to
heal him of his grievous wounds.

And thence-from the Elysium of the Celts-popular belief has always been
that he will some day return. But just as the gods of the Gaels are said
to dwell sometimes in the "Land of the Living", beyond the western wave,
and sometimes in the palace of a hollow hill, so Arthur is sometimes
thought to be in Avilion, and sometimes to be sitting with his champions
in a charmed sleep in some secret place, waiting for the trumpet to be
blown that shall call him forth to reconquer Britain. The legend is
found in the Eildon Hills; in the Snowdon district; at Cadbury, in
Somerset, the best authenticated Camelot; in the Vale of Neath, in South
Wales; as well as in other places. He slumbers, but he has not died. The
ancient Welsh poem called "The Verses of the Graves of the
Warriors"[435] enumerates the last resting-places of most of the British
gods and demi-gods. "The grave of Gwydion is in the marsh of Dinlleu",
the grave of Lieu Llaw Gyffes is "under the protection of the sea with
which he was familiar", and "where the wave makes a sullen sound is the
grave of Dylan"; we know the graves of Pryderi, of Gwalchmei, of March,
of Mabon, even of the great Beli, but

            "Not wise the thought-a grave for Arthur".[436]

-----

Footnote 358:

  A poem in praise of Geraint, "the brave man from the region of
  Dyvnaint (Devon) ... the enemy of tyranny and oppression", is
  contained in both the Black Book of Caermarthen and the Red Book of
  Hergest. "When Geraint was born, open were the gates of heaven",
  begins its last verse. It is translated in Vol. I of Skene, p. 267.

Footnote 359:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 8.

Footnote 360:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 40-41.

Footnote 361:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 7.

Footnote 362:

  "It is worthy of remark that the fame of Arthur is widely spread; he
  is claimed alike as a prince in Brittany, Cornwall, Wales,
  Cumberland, and the Lowlands of Scotland; that is to say, his fame
  is conterminous with the Brythonic race, and does not extend to the
  Gaels".-_Chambers's Encyclopdia._

Footnote 363:

  For Arthurian and Fenian parallels see Campbell's _Popular Tales of
  the West Highlands_.

Footnote 364:

  See chap. I of Rhys's _Arthurian Legend_-"Arthur, Historical and
  Mythical".

Footnote 365:

  A triad in the Hengwrt MS. 536, translated by Skene. It was Trystan
  who was watching the swine for his uncle, while the swineherd went
  with a message to Essylt (Iseult), "and Arthur desired one pig by
  deceit or by theft, and could not get it."

Footnote 366:

  See note to chap. XXII-"The Treasures of Britain".

Footnote 367:

  _Book of Taliesin_, poem XXX, Skene, Vol. I, p. 256.

Footnote 368:

  In a probably very ancient poem embedded in the sixteenth-century
  Welsh romance called _Taliesin_, included by Lady Guest in her
  _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 369:

  "The existence of a sixth-century bard of this name, a contemporary of
  the heroic stage of British resistance to the Germanic invaders, is
  well attested. A number of poems are found in medival Welsh MSS.,
  chief among them the so-called _Book of Taliesin_, ascribed to this
  sixth-century poet. Some of these are almost as old as any remains of
  Welsh poetry, and may go back to the early tenth or the ninth century;
  others are productions of the eleventh, twelfth, and even thirteenth
  centuries."-Nutt: Notes to his (1902) edition of Lady Guest's
  _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 370:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 551.

Footnote 371:

  "There can be little doubt but that the sixth-century bard succeeded
  to the form and attributes of a far older, a prehistoric, a mythic
  singer."-Nutt: Notes to _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 372:

  I have been obliged to collate four different translators to obtain an
  acceptable version of what Mr. T. Stephens, in his _Literature of the
  Kymri_, calls "one of the least intelligible of the mythological
  poems". My authorities have been Skene, Stephens, Nash, and Rhys.

Footnote 373:

  A form of the name Gwydion.

Footnote 374:

  The name of Arthur's ship.

Footnote 375:

  Revolving Castle.

Footnote 376:

  Four-cornered Castle.

Footnote 377:

  The Cold Place.

Footnote 378:

  Castle of Revelry.

Footnote 379:

  Kingly Castle.

Footnote 380:

  Glass Castle.

Footnote 381:

  Castle of Riches.

Footnote 382:

  Meaning is unknown. See chap. XVI-"The Gods of the Britons".

Footnote 383:

  Meaning is unknown. See chap. XX-"The Victories of Light over
  Darkness".

Footnote 384:

  Unless they should be "the yellow and the brindled bull" mentioned in
  the story of _Kulhwch and Olwen_.

Footnote 385:

  _Book of Taliesin_, poem XIV. The translation is by Rhys: _Arthurian
  Legend_, p. 301.

Footnote 386:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 325.

Footnote 387:

  Rhys: _ibid._, chap. I.

Footnote 388:

  Malory's _Morte Darthur_, Book II, chap. II.

Footnote 389:

  _Historia Britonum_, Book VIII, chap. XX.

Footnote 390:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 169.

Footnote 391:

  Rhys: _ibid._, p. 169.

Footnote 392:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 13.

Footnote 393:

  Rhys: _ibid._, pp. 19-23.

Footnote 394:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 168.

Footnote 395:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 167.

Footnote 396:

  See Rhys's exposition of the mythological meaning of the _Red Book_
  romance of the _Dream of Maxen Wledig_, in his _Hibbert Lectures_, pp.
  160-175.

Footnote 397:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 192-195.

Footnote 398:

  _Historia Britonum_, Book VIII, chaps. IX-XII.

Footnote 399:

  See chap. IV and Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 194.

Footnote 400:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 158, 159.

Footnote 401:

  _Ibid._, p. 155.

Footnote 402:

  Plutarch: _De Defectu Oraculorum_.

Footnote 403:

  The _Seint Greal_, quoted by Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, pp. 61-62.

Footnote 404:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 59.

Footnote 405:

  Elton: _Origins of English History_, p. 269.

Footnote 406:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 12.

Footnote 407:

  _Ibid._, p. 70.

Footnote 408:

  The name March means "horse".

Footnote 409:

  _Morte Darthur._ Book X, chap. XXVII.

Footnote 410:

  Called Labraid Longsech.

Footnote 411:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_. See chap. XI-"Urien and his Congeners".

Footnote 412:

  _Ibid._, p. 260.

Footnote 413:

  _Ibid._, p. 261.

Footnote 414:

  _Ibid._, p. 256.

Footnote 415:

  Red Book of Hergest, XII. Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, pp. 253-256.

Footnote 416:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 247.

Footnote 417:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 418:

  _The Death-song of Owain._ Taliesin, XLIV, Skene, Vol. I, p. 366.

Footnote 419:

  Book of Taliesin, XXXII. Skene, however, translates the word rendered
  "evening" by Rhys as "cultivated plain".

Footnote 420:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 345.

Footnote 421:

  Both by Malory and Geoffrey of Monmouth.

Footnote 422:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 256.

Footnote 423:

  See chap. XVIII-"The Wooing of Branwen and the Beheading of Brn".

Footnote 424:

  He is called Ogyrvran the Giant.

Footnote 425:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 326.

Footnote 426:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, pp. 268-269.

Footnote 427:

  Rhys: _Lectures on Welsh Philology_, p. 306. But the derivation is
  only tentative, and an interesting alternative one is given, which
  equates him with the Persian Ahriman.

Footnote 428:

  The enumeration of Arthur's three Gwynhwyvars forms one of the Welsh
  triads.

Footnote 429:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 342.

Footnote 430:

  See chap. XI-"The Gods in Exile".

Footnote 431:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, chap. II-"Arthur and Airem".

Footnote 432:

  In the mysterious Lancelot, not found in Arthurian story before the
  Norman adaptations of it, Professor Rhys is inclined to see a British
  sun-god, or solar hero. A number of interesting comparisons are drawn
  between him and the Peredur and Owain of the later "Mabinogion" tales,
  as well as with the Gaelic Cuchulainn. See _Studies in the Arthurian
  Legend_.

Footnote 433:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XXI, chap. I.

Footnote 434:

  The fullest list of translated triads is contained in the appendix to
  Probert's _Ancient Laws of Cambria_, 1823. Many are also given as an
  appendix in Skene's _Four Ancient Books of Wales_.

Footnote 435:

  _Black Book of Caermarthen XIX_, Vol. I, pp. 309-318 in Skene.

Footnote 436:

  This is Professor Rhys's translation of the Welsh line, no doubt more
  strictly correct than the famous rendering: "Unknown is the grave of
  Arthur".

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XXII

                        THE TREASURES OF BRITAIN


It is in keeping with the mythological character of Arthur that the
early Welsh tales recorded of him are of a different nature from those
which swell the pseudo-histories of Nennius[437] and of Geoffrey of
Monmouth. We hear nothing of that subjugation of the countries of
Western Europe which fills so large a part in the two books of the
_Historia Britonum_ which Geoffrey has devoted to him.[438] Conqueror he
is, but his conquests are not in any land known to geographers. It is
against Hades, and not against Rome, that he achieves his highest
triumphs. This is the true history of King Arthur, and we may read more
fragments and snatches of it in two prose-tales preserved in the Red
Book of Hergest. Both these tales date, in the actual form in which they
have come down to us, from the twelfth century. But, in each of them,
the writer seems to be stretching out his hands to gather in the dying
traditions of a very remote past.

When a Welsh man-at-arms named Rhonabwy lay down, one night, to sleep
upon a yellow calf-skin, the only furniture in a noisome hut, in which
he had taken shelter, that was comparatively free from vermin, he had
the vision which is related in the tale called "The Dream of
Rhonabwy".[439] He thought that he was travelling with his companions
towards the Severn, when they heard a rushing noise behind them, and,
looking back, saw a gigantic rider upon a monstrous horse. So terrible
was the horseman's appearance that they all started to run from him. But
their running was of no avail, for every time the horse drew in its
breath, it sucked them back to its very chest, only, however, to fling
them forward as it breathed out again. In despair they fell down and
besought their pursuer's mercy. He granted it, asked their names, and
told them, in return, his own. He was known as Iddawc the Agitator of
Britain; for it was he who, in his love of war, had purposely
precipitated the Battle of Camlan. Arthur had sent him to reason with
Medrawt; but though Arthur had charged him with the fairest sayings he
could think of, Iddawc translated them into the harshest he could
devise. But he had done seven years' penance, and had been forgiven, and
was now riding to Arthur's camp. Thither he insisted upon taking
Rhonabwy and his companions.

Arthur's army was encamped for a mile around the ford of Rhyd y Groes,
upon both sides of the road; and on a small flat island in the middle of
the river was the Emperor himself, in converse with Bedwini the Bishop
and Gwarthegyd, the son of Kaw. Like Ossian, when he came back to
Ireland after his three hundred years' sojourn in the "Land of
Promise",[440] Arthur marvelled at the puny size of the people whom
Iddawc had brought for him to look at. "And where, Iddawc, didst thou
find these little men?" "I found them, Lord, up yonder on the road."
Then the Emperor smiled. "Lord," said Iddawc, "wherefore dost thou
laugh?" "Iddawc," replied Arthur, "I laugh not; but it pitieth me that
men of such stature as these should have this island in their keeping,
after the men that guarded it of yore." Then he turned away, and Iddawc
told Rhonabwy and his companions to keep silent, and they would see what
they would see.

The scope of such a book as this allows no space to describe the persons
and equipments of the warriors who came riding down with their companies
to join Arthur, as he made his great march to fight the Battle of Badon,
thought by some to be historical, and located at Bath. The reader who
turns to the tale itself will see what Rhonabwy saw. Many of Arthur's
warriors he will know by name: Caradawc the Strong-armed, who is here
called a son, not of Brn, but of Llyr; March son of Meirchion, the
underworld king; Kai, described as "the fairest horseman in all Arthur's
court"; Gwalchmei, the son of Gwyar and of Arthur himself; Mabon, the
son of Modron; Trystan son of Tallwch, the lover of "The Fair Isoult";
Goreu, Arthur's cousin and his rescuer from Manawyddan's bone-prison;
these, and many more, will pass before him, as they passed before
Rhonabwy during the three days and three nights that he slept and
dreamed upon the calf-skin.

This story of the "Dream of Rhonabwy", elaborate as it is in all its
details, is yet, in substance, little more than a catalogue. The
intention of its unknown author seems to have been to draw a series of
pictures of what he considered to be the principal among Arthur's
followers. The other story-that of "Kulhwch and Olwen"-also takes this
catalogue form, but the matters enumerated are of a different kind. It
is not so much a record of men as of things. Not the heroes of Britain,
but the treasures of Britain are its subject. One might compare it with
the Gaelic story of the adventures of the three sons of Tuirenn.[441]

The "Thirteen Treasures of Britain" were famous in early legend. They
belonged to gods and heroes, and were current in our island till the end
of the divine age, when Merlin, fading out of the world, took them with
him into his airy tomb, never to be seen by mortal eyes again. According
to tradition,[442] they consisted of a sword, a basket, a drinking-horn,
a chariot, a halter, a knife, a cauldron, a whetstone, a garment, a pan,
a platter, a chess-board, and a mantle, all possessed of not less
marvellous qualities than the apples, the pig-skin, the spear, the
horses and chariot, the pigs, the hound-whelp, and the cooking-spit
which the sons of Tuirenn obtained for Lugh.[443] It is these same
legendary treasures that reappear, no doubt, in the story of "Kulhwch
and Olwen". The number tallies, for there are thirteen of them. Some are
certainly, and others probably, identical with those of the other
tradition. That there should be discrepancies need cause no surprise,
for it is not unlikely that there were several different versions of
their legend. Everyone had heard of the Thirteen Treasures of Britain.
Many, no doubt, disputed as to what they were. Others might ask whence
they came. The story of "Kulhwch and Olwen" was composed to tell them.
They were won by Arthur and his mighty men.

Kulhwch[444] is the hero of the story and Olwen is its heroine, but
only, as it were, by courtesy. The pair provide a love-interest which,
as in the tales of all primitive people, is kept in the background. The
woman, in such romances, takes the place of the gold and gems in a
modern "treasure-hunt" story; she is won by overcoming external
obstacles, and not by any difficulty in obtaining her own consent. In
this romance[445], Kulhwch was the son of a king who afterwards married
a widow with a grown-up daughter, whom his stepmother urged Kulhwch to
marry. On his modestly replying that he was not yet of an age to wed,
she laid the destiny on him that he should never have a wife at all,
unless he could win Olwen, the daughter of a terrible father called
"Hawthorn, Chief of Giants".[446]

The "Chief of Giants" was as hostile to suitors as he was monstrous in
shape; and no wonder! for he knew that on his daughter's marriage his
own life would come to an end. Both in this peculiarity and in the
description of his ponderous eyebrows, which fell so heavily over his
eyes that he could not see until they had been lifted up with forks, he
reminds one of the Fomor, Balor. Of his daughter, on the other hand, the
Welsh tale gives a description as beautiful as Olwen was, herself. "More
yellow was her head than the flower of the broom, and her skin was
whiter than the foam of the wave, and fairer were her hands and her
fingers than the blossoms of the wood anemone amidst the spray of the
meadow-fountain. The eye of the trained hawk, the glance of the
three-mewed falcon was not brighter than hers. Her bosom was more snowy
than the breast of the white swan, her cheek was redder than the reddest
roses. Whoso beheld her was filled with her love. Four white trefoils
sprung up wherever she trod. And therefore was she called Olwen."[447]

Kulhwch had no need to see her to fall in love with her. He blushed at
her very name, and asked his father how he could obtain her in marriage.
His father reminded him that he was Arthur's cousin, and advised him to
claim Olwen from him as a boon.

So Kulhwch "pricked forth upon a steed with head dappled grey, of four
winters old, firm of limb, with shell-formed hoofs, having a bridle of
linked gold on his head, and upon him a saddle of costly gold. And in
the youth's hand were two spears of silver, sharp, well-tempered, headed
with steel, three ells in length, of an edge to wound the wind, and
cause blood to flow, and swifter than the fall of the dewdrop from the
blade of reed-grass upon the earth when the dew of June is at the
heaviest. A gold-hilted sword was upon his thigh, the blade of which was
of gold, bearing a cross of inlaid gold of the hue of the lightning of
heaven; his war-horn was of ivory. Before him were two brindled
white-breasted greyhounds, having strong collars of rubies about their
necks, reaching from the shoulder to the ear. And the one that was on
the left side bounded across to the right side, and the one on the right
to the left, and like two sea-swallows sported around him. And his
courser cast up four sods with his four hoofs, like four swallows in the
air, about his head, now above, now below. About him was a four-cornered
cloth of purple, and an apple of gold was at each corner, and every one
of the apples was of the value of an hundred kine. And there was
precious gold of the value of three hundred kine upon his shoes, and
upon his stirrups, from his knee to the tip of his toe. And the blade of
grass bent not beneath him, so light was his courser's tread as he
journeyed towards the gate of Arthur's palace."

Nor did this bold suitor stand greatly upon ceremony. He arrived after
the portal of the palace had been closed for the night, and, contrary to
all precedent, sent to Arthur demanding instant entry. Although, too, it
was the custom for visitors to dismount at the horse-block at the gate,
he did not do so, but rode his charger into the hall. After greetings
had passed between him and Arthur, and he had announced his name, he
demanded Olwen for his bride at the hands of the Emperor and his
warriors.

Neither Arthur nor any of his court had ever heard of Olwen. However, he
promised his cousin either to find her for him, or to prove that there
was no such person. He ordered his most skilful warriors to accompany
Kulhwch; Kai, with his companion Bedwyr, the swiftest of men; Kynddelig,
who was as good a guide in a strange country as in his own; Gwrhyr, who
knew all the languages of men, as well as of all other creatures;
Gwalchmei, who never left an adventure unachieved; and Menw, who could
render himself and his companions invisible at will.

They travelled until they came to a castle on an open plain. Feeding on
the plain was a countless herd of sheep, and, on a mound close by, a
monstrous shepherd with a monstrous dog. Menw cast a spell over the dog,
and they approached the shepherd. He was called Custennin, a brother of
Hawthorn, while his wife was a sister of Kulhwch's own mother. The evil
chief of giants had reduced his brother to servitude, and murdered all
his twenty-four sons save one, who was kept hidden in a stone chest.
Therefore he welcomed Kulhwch and the embassy from Arthur, and promised
to help them secretly, the more readily since Kai offered to take the
one surviving son under his protection. Custennin's wife procured
Kulhwch a secret meeting with Olwen, and the damsel did not altogether
discourage her wooer's suit.

The party started for Hawthorn's castle. Without raising any alarm, they
slew the nine porters and the nine watch-dogs, and came unhindered into
the hall. They greeted the ponderous giant, and announced the reason of
their coming. "Where are my pages and my servants?" he said. "Raise up
the forks beneath my two eyebrows which have fallen over my eyes, so
that I may see the fashion of my son-in-law." He glared at them, and
told them to come again upon the next day.

They turned to go, and, as they did so, Hawthorn seized a poisoned dart,
and threw it after them. But Bedwyr caught it, and cast it back,
wounding the giant's knee. They left him grumbling, slept at the house
of Custennin, and returned, the next morning.

Again they demanded Olwen from her father, threatening him with death if
he refused. "Her four great-grandmothers, and her four great-grandsires
are yet alive," replied Hawthorn; "it is needful that I take counsel of
them." So they turned away, and, as they went, he flung a second dart,
which Menw caught, and hurled back, piercing the giant's body.

The next time they came, Hawthorn warned them not to shoot at him again,
unless they desired death. Then he ordered his eyebrows to be lifted up,
and, as soon as he could see, he flung a poisoned dart straight at
Kulhwch. But the suitor himself caught it, and flung it back, so that it
pierced Hawthorn's eyeball and came out through the back of his head.
Here again we are reminded of the myth of Lugh and Balor. Hawthorn,
however, was not killed, though he was very much discomforted. "A cursed
ungentle son-in-law, truly!" he complained. "As long as I remain alive,
my eyesight will be the worse. Whenever I go against the wind, my eyes
will water; and peradventure my head will burn, and I shall have a
giddiness every new moon. Cursed be the fire in which it was forged!
Like the bite of a mad dog is the stroke of this poisoned iron."

It was now the turn of Kulhwch and his party to warn the giant that
there must be no more dart-throwing. He appeared, indeed, more amenable
to reason, and allowed himself to be placed opposite to Kulhwch, in a
chair, to discuss the amount of his daughter's bride-price.

Its terms, as he gradually unfolded them, were terrific. The blood-fine
paid for Cian to Lugh seems, indeed, a trifle beside it. To obtain
grain, for food and liquor at his daughter's wedding, a vast hill which
he showed to Kulhwch must be rooted up, levelled, ploughed, sown, and
harvested in one day. No one could do this except Amaethon son of Dn,
the divine husbandman, and Govannan son of Dn, the divine smith, and
they must have the service of three pairs of magic oxen. He must also
have returned to him the same nine bushels of flax which he had sown in
his youth, and which had never come up; for only out of this very flax
should be made the white wimple for Olwen's head. For mead, too, he must
have honey "nine times sweeter than the honey of the virgin swarm".

Then followed the enumeration of the thirteen treasures to be paid to
him as dowry. Such a list of wedding presents was surely never known! No
pot could hold such honey as he demanded but the magic vessel of Llwyr,
the son of Llwyryon. There would not be enough food for all the
wedding-guests, unless he had the basket of Gwyddneu Garanhir, from
which all the men in the world could be fed, thrice nine at a time. No
cauldron could cook the meat, except that of Diwrnach the Gael. The
mystic drinking-horn of Gwlgawd Gododin must be there, to give them
drink. The harp of Teirtu, which, like the Dagda's, played of itself,
must make music for them. The giant father-in-law's hair could only be
shorn with one instrument-the tusk of White-tooth, King of the Boars,
and not even by that unless it was plucked alive out of its owner's
mouth. Also, before the hair could be cut, it must be spread out, and
this could not be done until it had been first softened with the blood
of the perfectly black sorceress, daughter of the perfectly white
sorceress, from the Source of the Stream of Sorrow, on the borders of
hell. Nor could the sorceress's blood be kept warm enough unless it was
placed in the bottles of Gwyddolwyn Gorr, which preserved the heat of
any liquor put into them, though it was carried from the east of the
world to the west. Another set of bottles he must also have to keep milk
for his guests in-those bottles of Rhinnon Rhin Barnawd in which no
drink ever turned sour. For himself, he required the sword of Gwrnach
the Giant, which that personage would never allow out of his own
keeping, because it was destined that he himself should fall by it. Last
of all, he must be given the comb, the razor, and the scissors which lay
between the ears of Twrch Trwyth, a king changed into the most terrible
of wild boars.

It is the chase of this boar which gives the story of "Kulhwch and
Olwen" its alternative title-"The Twrch Trwyth". The task was one worthy
of gods and demi-gods. Its contemplation might well have appalled
Kulhwch, who, however, was not so easily frightened. To every fresh
demand, every new obstacle put in his way, he gave the same answer:

"It will be easy for me to compass this, although thou mayest think that
it will not be easy".

Whether it was easy or not will be seen from the conditions under which
alone the hunt could be brought to a successful end. No ordinary hounds
or huntsmen would avail. The chief of the pack must be Drudwyn, the
whelp of Greid the son of Eri, led in the one leash that would hold him,
fastened, by the one chain strong enough, to the one collar that would
contain his neck. No huntsman could hunt with this dog except Mabon son
of Modron; and he had, ages before, been taken from between his mother
and the wall when he was three nights old, and it was not known where he
was, or even whether he were living or dead. There was only one steed
that could carry Mabon, namely Gwynn Mygdwn, the horse of Gweddw. Two
other marvellous hounds, the cubs of Gast Rhymhi, must also be obtained;
they must be held in the only leash they would not break, for it would
be made out of the beard of the giant Dissull, plucked from him while he
was still alive. Even with this, no huntsman could lead them except
Kynedyr Wyllt, who was himself nine times more wild than the wildest
beast upon the mountains. All Arthur's mighty men must come to help,
even Gwyn son of Nudd, upon his black horse; and how could he be spared
from his terrible duty of restraining the devils in hell from breaking
loose and destroying the world?

Here is material for romance indeed! But, unhappily, we shall never know
the full story of how all these magic treasures were obtained, all these
magic hounds captured and compelled to hunt, all these magic huntsmen
brought to help. The story-which Mr. Nutt[448] considers to be, "saving
the finest tales of the Arabian Nights', the greatest romantic fairy
tale the world has ever known"-is not, as we have it now, complete. It
reads fully enough; but, on casting backwards and forwards, between the
list of feats to be performed and the body of the tale which is supposed
to relate them all, we find many of them wanting. "The host of Arthur",
we are told, "dispersed themselves into parties of one and two", each
party intent upon some separate quest. The adventures of some of them
have come down, but those of others have not. We are told how Kai slew
Gwrnach the Giant with his own sword; how Gwyrthur son of Greidawl,
Gwyn's rival for the love of Creudylad, saved an anthill from fire, and
how the grateful ants searched for and found the very flax-seeds sown by
Hawthorn in his youth; how Arthur's host surrounded and took Gast
Rhymhi's cubs, and how Kai and Bedwyr overcame Dissull, and plucked out
his beard with wooden tweezers, to make a leash for them. We learn how
Arthur went to Ireland, and brought back the cauldron of Diwrnach the
Gael, full of Irish money; how White-tusk the Boar-king was chased and
killed; and how Arthur condescended to slay the perfectly black
sorceress with his own hand. That others of the treasures were acquired
is hinted rather than said. Most important of all (for so much depended
on him), we find out where the stolen Mabon was, and learn how he was
rescued.

So many ages had elapsed since Mabon had disappeared that there seemed
little hope of ever finding news of him. Nevertheless Gwrhyr, who spoke
the languages of all creatures, went to enquire of that ancient bird,
the Ousel of Cilgwri. But the Ousel, though in her time she had pecked a
smith's anvil down to the size of a nut, was yet too young to have heard
of Mabon. She sent Gwrhyr to a creature formed before her, the Stag of
Redynvre. But though the Stag had lived to see an oak-sapling slowly
grow to be a tree with a thousand branches, and as slowly decay again
till it was a withered stump, he had never heard of Mabon.

Therefore he sent him on to a creature still older than himself-the Owl
of Cwm Cawlwyd. The wood she lived in had been thrice rooted up, and had
thrice re-sown itself, and yet, in all that immense time, she had never
heard of Mabon. There was but one who might have, she told Gwrhyr, and
he was the Eagle of Gwern Abwy.

Here, at last, they struck Mabon's trail. "The Eagle said: I have been
here for a great space of time, and when I first came hither there was a
rock here, from the top of which I pecked at the stars every evening;
and now it is not so much as a span high. From that day to this I have
been here, and I have never heard of the man for whom you inquire,
except once when I went in search of food as far as Llyn Llyw. And when
I came there, I struck my talons into a salmon, thinking he would serve
me as food for a long time. But he drew me into the deep, and I was
scarcely able to escape from him. After that I went with my whole
kindred to attack him, and to try to destroy him, but he sent
messengers, and made peace with me; and came and besought me to take
fifty fish spears out of his back. Unless he know something of him whom
you seek, I cannot tell who may. However, I will guide you to the place
where he is.'"

It happened that the Salmon did know. With every tide he went up the
Severn as far as the walls of Gloucester, and there, he said, he had
found such wrong as he had never found anywhere else. So he took Kai and
Gwrhyr upon his shoulders and carried them to the wall of the prison
where a captive was heard lamenting. This was Mabon son of Modron, who
was suffering such imprisonment as not even Lludd of the Silver Hand or
Greid, the son of Eri,[449] the other two of the "Three Paramount
Prisoners of Britain", had endured before him. But it came to an end
now; for Kai sent to Arthur, and he and his warriors stormed Gloucester,
and brought Mabon away.

All was at last ready for the final achievement-the hunting of Twrch
Trwyth, who was now, with his seven young pigs, in Ireland. Before he
was roused, it was thought wise to send the wizard Menw to find out by
ocular inspection whether the comb, the scissors, and the razor were
still between his ears. Menw took the form of a bird, and settled upon
the Boar's head. He saw the coveted treasures, and tried to take one of
them, but Twrch Trwyth shook himself so violently that some of the venom
from his bristles spurted over Menw, who was never quite well again from
that day.

Then the hunt was up, the men surrounded him, and the dogs were loosed
at him from every side. On the first day, the Irish attacked him. On the
second day, Arthur's household encountered him and were worsted. Then
Arthur himself fought with him for nine days and nine nights without
even killing one of the little pigs.

A truce was now called, so that Gwrhyr, who spoke all languages, might
go and parley with him. Gwrhyr begged him to give up in peace the comb,
the scissors, and the razor, which were all that Arthur wanted. But the
Boar Trwyth, indignant of having been so annoyed, would not. On the
contrary, he promised to go on the morrow into Arthur's country, and do
all the harm he could there.

So Twrch Trwyth with his seven pigs crossed the sea into Wales, and
Arthur followed with his warriors in the ship "Prydwen". Here the story
becomes wonderfully realistic and circumstantial. We are told of every
place they passed through on the long chase through South Wales, and can
trace the course of the hunt over the map.[450] We know of every check
the huntsmen had, and what happened every time the boars turned to bay.
The "casualty-list" of Arthur's men is completely given; and we can also
follow the shrinking of Twrch Trwyth's herd, as his little pigs fell one
by one. None were left but Trwyth himself by the time the Severn estuary
was reached, at the mouth of the Wye.

Here the hunt came up with him, and drove him into the water, and in
this unfamiliar element he was outmatched. Osla Big-Knife[451],
Manawyddan son of Llyr, Kacmwri, the servant of Arthur, and Gwyngelli
caught him by his four feet and plunged his head under water, while the
two chief huntsmen, Mabon son of Modron, and Kyledyr Willt, came, one on
each side of him, and took the scissors and the razor. Before they could
get the comb, however, he shook himself free, and struck out for
Cornwall, leaving Osla and Kacmwri half-drowned in the Severn.

And all this trouble, we are told, was mere play compared with the
trouble they had with him in Cornwall before they could get the comb.
But, at last, they secured it, and drove the boar out over the deep sea.
He passed out of sight, with two of the magic hounds in pursuit of him,
and none of them have ever been heard of since.

The sight of these treasures, paraded before Hawthorn, chief of giants,
was, of course, his death-warrant. All who wished him ill came to gloat
over his downfall. But they should have been put to shame by the giant,
whose end had, at least, a certain dignity. "My daughter", he said to
Kulhwch, "is yours, but you need not thank me for it, but Arthur, who
has accomplished all this. By my free will you should never have had
her, for with her I lose my life."

Thereupon they cut off his head, and put it upon a pole; and that night
the undutiful Olwen became Kulhwch's bride.

-----

Footnote 437:

  "History of the Britons",  50.

Footnote 438:

  Geoffrey of Monmouth. Books IX and X, and chaps. I and II of XI.

Footnote 439:

  Translated by Lady Guest in her _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 440:

  See chap. XIV-"Finn and the Fenians".

Footnote 441:

  Chap. VIII-"The Gaelic Argonauts".

Footnote 442:

  The list will be found, translated from an old Welsh MS., in the notes
  to _Kulhwch and Olwen_, in Lady Guest's _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 443:

  Chap. VIII-"The Gaelic Argonauts".

Footnote 444:

  Pronounced _Keelhookh_.

Footnote 445:

  The following pages sketch out the main incidents of the story as
  translated by Lady Guest in her _Mabinogion_.

Footnote 446:

  In Welsh, _Yspaddaden Penkawr_.

Footnote 447:

  _I.e._ She of the White Track. The beauty of Olwen was proverbial in
  medival Welsh poetry.

Footnote 448:

  In his notes to his edition of Lady Guest's _Mabinogion_. Published
  1902.

Footnote 449:

  So says the text. But a triad quoted by Lady Guest in her notes gives
  the "Three Paramount Prisoners of Britain" differently. "The three
  supreme prisoners of the Island of Britain, Llyr Llediath in the
  prison of Euroswydd Wledig, and Madoc, or Mabon, and Gweir, son of
  Gweiryoth; and one more exalted than the three, and that was Arthur,
  who was for three nights in the Castle of Oeth and Anoeth, and three
  nights in the prison of Wen Pendragon, and three nights in the dark
  prison under the stone. And one youth released him from these three
  prisons; that youth was Goreu the son of Custennin, his cousin."

Footnote 450:

  See Rhys: _Celtic Folklore_, chap. X-"Place-name Stories".

Footnote 451:

  The "big knife" was, we are told in the story, "a short broad dagger.
  When Arthur and his hosts came before a torrent, they would seek for a
  narrow place where they might pass the water, and would lay the
  sheathed dagger across the torrent, and it would form a bridge
  sufficient for the armies of the three islands of Britain, and of the
  three islands adjacent, with their spoil."

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                   THE GODS AS KING ARTHUR'S KNIGHTS


It is not, however, by such fragments of legend that Arthur is best
known to English readers. Not Arthur the god, but Arthur the "blameless
king", who founded the Table Round, from which he sent forth his knights
"to ride abroad redressing human wrongs",[452] is the figure which the
name conjures up. Nor is it even from Sir Thomas Malory's Morte Darthur
that this conception comes to most of us, but from Tennyson's _Idylls of
the King_. But Tennyson has so modernized the ancient tradition that it
retains little of the old Arthur but the name. He tells us himself that
his poem had but very slight relation to-

                 ... "that gray king, whose name, a ghost,
         Streams like a cloud, man-shaped, from mountain-peak,
         And cleaves to cairn and cromlech still; or him
         Of Geoffrey's book, or him of Malleor's ...";[453]

but that he merely used the legend to give a substantial form to his
ideal figure of the perfect English gentleman-a title to which the
original Arthur could scarcely have laid claim. Still less does there
remain in it the least trace of anything that could suggest mythology.

As much as this, however, might be said of Malory's book. We may be
fairly certain that the good Sir Thomas had no idea that the personages
of whom he wrote had ever been anything different from the Christian
knights which they had become in the late French romances from which he
compiled his own fifteenth-century work. The old gods had been, from
time to time, very completely euhemerized. The characters of the "Four
Branches of the Mabinogi" are still recognizable as divine beings. In
the later Welsh stories, however, their divinity merely hangs about them
in shreds and tatters, and the first Norman adapters of these stories
made them still more definitely human. By the time Malory came to build
up his Morte Darthur from the foreign romances, they had altered so much
that the shapes and deeds of gods could only be recognized under their
medival knightly disguises by those who had known them in their ancient
forms.

We have chosen Malory's Morte Darthur, as almost the sole representative
of Arthurian literature later than the Welsh poems and prose stories,
for three reasons. Firstly, because it is the English Arthurian romance
_par excellence_ from which all later English authors, including
Tennyson, have drawn their material. Secondly, because the mass of
foreign literature dealing with the subject of Arthur is in itself a
life-study, and could not by any possibility be compressed within the
limits of a chapter. Thirdly, because Malory's fine judgment caused him
to choose the best and most typical foreign tales to weave into his own
romance; and hence it is that we find most of our old British gods-both
those of the earlier cycle and those of the system connected with
Arthur-striding disguised through his pages.

Curiously enough, Sir Edward Strachey, in his preface to the "Globe"
edition of Caxton's Morte Darthur, uses almost the same image to
describe Malory's prose-poem that Matthew Arnold handled with such
effect, in his _Study of Celtic Literature_, to point out the real
nature of the Mabinogion. "Malory", he says, "has built a great,
rambling, medival castle, the walls of which enclose rude and even
ruinous work of earlier times." How rude and how ruinous these relics
were Malory doubtless had not the least idea, for he has completely
jumbled the ancient mythology. Not only do gods of the older and newer
order appear together, but the same deities, under very often only
slightly varying names, come up again and again as totally different
characters.

Take, for example, the ancient deity of death and Hades. As King
Brandegore, or Brandegoris (Brn of Gower), he brings five thousand
mounted men to oppose King Arthur;[454] but, as Sir Brandel, or
Brandiles (Brn of Gwales[455]), he is a valiant Knight of the Round
Table, who dies fighting in Arthur's service.[456] Again, under his name
of Uther Pendragon (Uther Ben), he is Arthur's father;[457] though as
King Ban of Benwyk (the "Square Enclosure", doubtless the same as
Taliesin's _Caer Pedryvan_ and Malory's _Carbonek_), he is a foreign
monarch, who is Arthur's ally.[458] Yet again, as the father of
Guinevere, Ogyrvran has become Leodegrance.[459] As King Uriens, or
Urience, of Gore (Gower), he marries one of Arthur's sisters,[460]
fights against him, but finally tenders his submission, and is enrolled
among his knights.[461] Urien may also be identified in the Morte
Darthur as King Rience, or Ryons, of North Wales,[462] and as King
Nentres of Garloth;[463] while, to crown the varied disguises of this
Proteus of British gods, he appears in an isolated episode as Balan, who
fights with his brother Balin until they kill one another.[464]

One may generally tell the divinities of the underworld in these
romances by their connection, not with the settled and civilized parts
of England, but with the wild and remote north and west, and the still
wilder and remoter islands. Just as Brn and Urien are kings of Gower,
so Arawn, under the corruptions of his name into "Anguish" and
"Anguissance", is made King of Scotland or Ireland, both countries
having been probably confounded, as the same land of the Scotti, or
Gaels.[465] Pwyll, Head of Annwn, we likewise discover under two
disguises. As Pelles, "King of the Foreign Country"[466] and Keeper of
the Holy Grail, he is a personage of great mythological significance,
albeit the real nature of him and his surroundings has been overlaid
with a Christian veneer as foreign to the original of Pelles as his own
kingdom was to Arthur's knights. The Chief of Hades figures as a "cousin
nigh unto Joseph of Arimathie",[467] who, "while he might ride supported
much Christendom, and holy church".[468] He is represented as the father
of Elayne (Elen[469]), whom he gives in marriage to Sir Launcelot,
bestowing upon the couple a residence called "Castle Bliant",[470] the
name of which, there is good evidence to show, is connected with that of
Pwyll's vassal called Teirnyon Twryf Vliant in the first of the
Mabinogi.[471] Under his other name of "Sir Pelleas"-the hero of
Tennyson's Idyll of _Pelleas and Ettarre_-the primitive myth of Pwyll is
touched at a different point. After his unfortunate love-passage with
Ettarre (or Ettard, as Malory calls her), Pelleas is represented as
marrying Nimue,[472] whose original name, which was Rhiannon, reached
this form, as well as that of "Vivien", through a series of miscopyings
of successive scribes.[473]

With Pelles, or Pelleas, is associated a King Pellean, or Pellam, his
son, and, equally with him, the Keeper of the Grail, who can be no other
than Pryderi.[474] Like that deity in the Mabinogi of Mth, he is
defeated by one of the gods of light. The dealer of the blow, however,
is not Arthur, as successor to Gwydion, but Balin, the Gallo-British
sun-god Belinus.[475]

Another dark deity, Gwyn son of Nudd, we discover under all of his three
titles. Called variously "Sir Gwinas",[476] "Sir Guynas",[477] and "Sir
Gwenbaus"[478] by Malory, the Welsh Gwynwas (or Gwyn) is altogether on
Arthur's side. The Cornish Melwas, split into two different knights,
divides his allegiance. As Sir Melias,[479] or Meleaus,[480] de Lile
("of the Isle"), he is a Knight of the Round Table, though, on the
quarrel between Arthur and Launcelot, he sides with the knight against
the king. But as Sir Meliagraunce, or Meliagaunce, it is he who, as in
the older myth, captures Queen Guinevere and carries her off to his
castle.[481] Under his Somerset name of Avallon, or Avallach, he is
connected with the episode of the Grail. King Evelake[482] is a Saracen
ruler who was converted by Joseph of Arimathea, and brought by him to
Britain. In his convert's enthusiasm, he attempted the quest of the holy
vessel, but was not allowed to succeed.[483] As a consolation, however,
it was divinely promised him that he should not die until he had seen a
knight of his blood in the ninth degree who should achieve it. This was
done by Sir Percivale, King Evelake being then three hundred years
old.[484]

Turning from deities of darkness to deities of light, we find the
sky-god figuring largely in the Morte Darthur. The Lludd of the earlier
mythology is Malory's King Loth, or Lot, of Orkney,[485] through an
intrigue with whose wife Arthur becomes the father of Sir Mordred. Lot's
wife was the mother also of Sir Gawain, whose birth Malory does not,
however, attribute to Arthur, though such must have been the original
form of the myth.[486] Sir Gawain, of the Arthurian legend, is the
Gwalchmei of the Welsh stories, the successor of the still earlier Lleu
Llaw Gyffes, just as Sir Mordred-the Welsh Medrawt-corresponds to Lleu's
brother Dylan. As Sir Mordred retains the dark character of Medrawt, so
Sir Gawain, even in Malory,[487] shows the attributes of a solar deity.
We are told that his strength increased gradually from dawn till high
noon, and then as gradually decreased again-a piece of pagan symbolism
which forms a good example of the appositeness of Sir Edward Strachey's
figure; for it stands out of the medival narrative like an ancient
brick in some more modern building.

The Zeus of the later cycle, Emrys or Myrddin, appears in the Morte
Darthur under both his names. The word "Emrys" becomes "Bors", and King
Bors of Gaul is made a brother of King Ban of Benwyck[488]-that is, Brn
of the Square Enclosure, the ubiquitous underworld god. Myrddin we meet
under no such disguise. The ever-popular Merlin still retains intact the
attributes of the sky-god. He remains above, and apart from all the
knights, higher even in some respects than King Arthur, to whom he
stands in much the same position as Mth does to Gwydion in the
Mabinogi.[489] Like Mth, he is an enchanter, and, like Mth, too, who
could hear everything said in the world, in however low a tone, if only
the wind met it, he is practically omniscient. The account of his final
disappearance, as told in the Morte Darthur, is only a re-embellishment
of the original story, the nature-myth giving place to what novelists
call "a feminine interest". Everyone knows how the great magician fell
into a dotage upon the "lady of the lake" whom Malory calls "Nimue", and
Tennyson "Vivien"-both names being that of "Rhiannon" in disguise.
"Merlin would let her have no rest, but always he would be with her ...
and she was ever passing weary of him, and fain would have been
delivered of him, for she was afeard of him because he was a devil's
son, and she could not put him away by no means. And so on a time it
happed that Merlin showed to her in a rock whereas was a great wonder,
and wrought by enchantment, that went under a great stone. So, by her
subtle working, she made Merlin to go under that stone to let her wit of
the marvels there, but she wrought so there for him that he never came
out for all the craft that he could do. And so she departed and left
Merlin."[490]

Merlin's living grave is still to be seen at the end of the _Val des
Fes_, in the forest of Brcilien, in Brittany. The tomb of stone is
certainly but a prosaic equivalent for the tower of woven air in which
the heaven-god went to his rest. Still, it is not quite so unpoetic as
the leather sack in which Rhiannon, the original of Nimue, caught and
imprisoned Gwawl, the earlier Merlin, like a badger in a bag.[491]

Elen, Myrddin's consort, appears in Malory as five different "Elaines".
Two of them are wives of the dark god, under his names of "King
Ban"[492] and "King Nentres".[493] A third is called the daughter of
King Pellinore, a character of uncertain origin.[494] But the two most
famous are the ladies who loved Sir Launcelot-"Elaine the Fair, Elaine
the lovable, Elaine the lily maid of Astolat",[495] and the luckier and
less scrupulous Elaine, daughter of King Pelles, and mother of Sir
Launcelot's son, Galahad.[496]

But it is time, now that the most important figures of British mythology
have been shown under their knightly disguises, and their place in
Arthurian legend indicated, to pass on to some account of the real
subject-matter of Sir Thomas Malory's romance. Externally, it is the
history of an Arthur, King of Britain, whom most people of Malory's time
considered as eminently a historical character. Around this central
narrative of Arthur's reign and deeds are grouped, in the form of
episodes, the personal exploits of the knights believed to have
supported him by forming a kind of household guard. But, with the
exception of a little magnified and distorted legendary history, the
whole cycle of romance may be ultimately resolved into a few myths, not
only retold, but recombined in several forms by their various tellers.
The Norman adapters of the _Matire de Bretagne_ found the British
mythology already in process of transformation, some of the gods having
dwindled into human warriors, and others into hardly less human druids
and magicians. Under their hands the British warriors became Norman
knights, who did their deeds of prowess in the tilt-yard, and found
their inspiration in the fantastic chivalry popularized by the
Trouveres, while the druids put off their still somewhat barbaric
druidism for the more conventional magic of the Latin races. More than
this, as soon as the real sequence and _raison d'tre_ of the tales had
been lost sight of, their adapters used a free hand in reweaving them.
Most of the romancers had their favourite characters whom they made the
central figure in their stories. Sir Gawain, Sir Percival, Sir Tristrem,
and Sir Owain (all of them probably once local British sun-gods) appear
as the most important personages of the romances called after their
names, stories of the doughty deeds of christened knights who had little
left about them either of Briton or of pagan.

It is only the labours of the modern scholar that can bring back to us,
at this late date, things long forgotten when Malory's book was issued
from Caxton's press. But oblivion is not annihilation, and Professor
Rhys points out to us the old myths lying embedded in their later
setting with almost the same certainty with which the geologist can show
us the fossils in the rock.[497] Thus treated, they resolve themselves
into three principal _motifs_, prominent everywhere in Celtic mythology:
the birth of the sun-god; the struggle between light and darkness; and
the raiding of the underworld by friendly gods for the good of man.

The first has been already dealt with.[498] It is the retelling of the
story of the origin of the sun-god in the Mabinogi of Mth, son of
Mthonwy. For Gwydion we now have Arthur; instead of Arianrod, the wife
of the superannuated sky-god Nwyvre, we find the wife of King Lot, the
superannuated sky-god Lludd; Lleu Llaw Gyffes rises again as Sir Gawain
(Gwalchmei), and Dylan as Sir Mordred (Medrawt); while the wise Merlin,
the Jupiter of the new system, takes the place of his wise prototype,
Mth. Connected with this first myth is the second-the struggle between
light and darkness, of which there are several versions in the Morte
Darthur. The leading one is the rebellion of the evilly-disposed Sir
Mordred against Arthur and Sir Gawain; while, on other stages, Balan-the
dark god Brn-fights with Balin-the sun-god Belinus; and the same Balin,
or Belinus, gives an almost mortal stroke to Pellam, the Pryderi of the
older mythology.

The same myth has also a wider form, in which the battle is waged for
possession of a maiden. Thus (to seek no other instances) Gwynhwyvar was
contended for by Arthur and Medrawt, or, in an earlier form of the myth,
by Arthur and Gwyn. In the Morte Darthur, Gwyn, under the corruption of
his Cornish name Melwas into "Sir Meliagraunce", still captures
Guinevere, but it is no longer Arthur who rescues her. That task, or
privilege, has fallen to a new champion. It is Sir Launcelot who follows
Sir Meliagraunce, defeats and slays him, and rescues the fair
captive.[499] But Sir Launcelot, it must be stated-probably to the
surprise of those to whom the Arthurian story without Launcelot and
Queen Guinevere must seem almost like the play of "Hamlet with Hamlet
left out",-is unknown to the original tradition. Welsh song and story
are silent with regard to him, and he is not improbably a creation of
some Norman romancer who calmly appropriated to his hero's credit deeds
earlier told of other "knights".

But the romantic treatment of these two myths by the adapters of the
_Matire de Bretagne_ are of smaller interest to us at the present day
than that of the third. The attraction of the Arthurian story lies less
in the battles of Arthur or the loves of Guinevere than in the legend
that has given it its lasting popularity-the Christian romance of the
Quest of the Holy Grail. So great and various has been the inspiration
of this legend to noble works both of art and literature that it seems
almost a kind of sacrilege to trace it back, like all the rest of
Arthur's story, to a paganism which could not have even understood, much
less created, its mystical beauty. None the less is the whole story
directly evolved from primitive pagan myths concerning a miraculous
cauldron of fertility and inspiration.

In the later romances, the Holy Grail is a Christian relic of marvellous
potency. It had held the Paschal lamb eaten at the Last Supper;[500]
and, after the death of Christ, Joseph of Arimathea had filled it with
the Saviour's blood.[501] But before it received this colouring, it had
been the magic cauldron of all the Celtic mythologies-the Dagda's
"Undry" which fed all who came to it, and from which none went away
unsatisfied;[502] Brn's cauldron of Renovation, which brought the dead
back to life;[503] the cauldron of Ogyrvran the Giant, from which the
Muses ascended;[504] the cauldrons captured by Cuchulainn from the King
of the Shadowy City,[505] and by Arthur from the chief of Hades;[506] as
well as several other mythic vessels of less note.

In its transition from pagan to Christian form, hardly one of the
features of the ancient myth has been really obscured. We may recount
the chief attributes, as Taliesin tells them in his "Spoiling of Annwn",
of the cauldron captured by Arthur. It was the property of Pwyll, and of
his son Pryderi, who lived in a kingdom of the other world called, among
other titles, the "Revolving Castle", the "Four-cornered Castle", the
"Castle of Revelry", the "Kingly Castle", the "Glass Castle", and the
"Castle of Riches". This place was surrounded by the sea, and in other
ways made difficult of access; there was no lack of wine there, and its
happy inhabitants spent with music and feasting an existence which
neither disease nor old age could assail. As for the cauldron, it had a
rim of pearls around its edge; the fire beneath it was kept fanned by
the breaths of nine maidens; it spoke, doubtless in words of prophetic
wisdom; and it would not cook the food of a perjurer or coward.[507]
Here we have considerable data on which to base a parallel between the
pagan cauldron and the Christian Grail.

Nor have we far to go in search of correspondences, for they are nearly
all preserved in Malory's romance. The mystic vessel was kept by King
Pelles, who is Pwyll, in a castle called "Carbonek", a name which
resolves itself, in the hands of the philologist, into _Caer bannawg_,
the "square" or "four-cornered castle"-in other words, the _Caer
Pedryvan_ of Taliesin's poem.[508] Of the character of the place as a
"Castle of Riches" and a "Castle of Revelry", where "bright wine was the
drink of the host", we have more than a hint in the account, twice
given,[509] of how, upon the appearance of the Grail-borne, it should be
noticed, by a maiden or angel-the hall was filled with good odours, and
every knight found on the table all the kinds of meat and drink he could
imagine as most desirable. It could not be seen by sinners,[510] a
Christian refinement of the savage idea of a pot that would not cook a
coward's food; but the sight of it alone would cure of wounds and
sickness those who approached it faithfully and humbly,[511] and in its
presence neither old age nor sickness could oppress them.[512] And,
though in Malory we find no reference either to the spot having been
surrounded by water, or to the castle as a "revolving" one, we have only
to turn from the Morte Darthur to the romance entitled the _Seint Greal_
to discover both. Gwalchmei, going to the castle of King Peleur
(Pryderi), finds it encircled by a great water, while Peredur,
approaching the same place, sees it turning with greater speed than the
swiftest wind. Moreover, archers on the walls shoot so vigorously that
no armour can resist their shafts, which explains how it happened that,
of those that went with Arthur, "except seven, none returned from Caer
Sidi".[513]

It is noticeable that Arthur himself never attempts the quest of the
Grail, though it was he who had achieved its pagan original. We find in
Malory four competitors for the mantle of Arthur-Sir Pelleas,[514] Sir
Bors, Sir Percivale, and Sir Galahad.[515] The first of these may be put
out of court at once, Sir Pelleas, who, being himself Pelles, or Pwyll,
the keeper of it, could have had no reason for such exertions. At the
second we may look doubtfully; for Sir Bors is no other than Emrys, or
Myrddin,[516] and, casting back to the earlier British mythology, we do
not find the sky-god personally active in securing boons by force or
craft from the underworld. The other two have better claims-Sir
Percivale and Sir Galahad. "Sir Percivale" is the Norman-French name for
Peredur,[517] the hero of a story in the Red Book of Hergest[518] which
gives the oldest form of a Grail quest we have. It is anterior to the
Norman romances, and forms almost a connecting-link between tales of
mythology and of chivalry. Peredur, or Sir Percivale, therefore, is the
oldest, most primitive, of Grail seekers. On the other hand, Sir Galahad
is the latest and youngest. But there is reason to believe that Galahad,
in Welsh "Gwalchaved", the "Falcon of Summer", is the same solar hero as
Gawain, in Welsh "Gwalchmei", the "Falcon of May".[519] Both are made,
in the story of "Kulhwch and Olwen", sons of the same mother, Gwyar. Sir
Gawain himself is, in one Arthurian romance, the achiever of the
Grail.[520] It is needless to attempt to choose between these two. Both
have the attributes of sun-gods. Gwalchmei, the successor of Lleu Llaw
Gyffes, and Peredur Paladrhir, that is to say, the "Spearman with the
Long Shaft",[521] may be allowed to claim equal honours. What is
important is that the quest of the Grail, once the chief treasure of
Hades, is still accomplished by one who takes in later legend the place
of Lieu Llaw Gyffes and Lugh Lamhfada in the earlier British and Gaelic
myths as a long-armed solar deity victorious in his strife against the
Powers of Darkness.

-----

Footnote 452:

  Tennyson's _Idylls of the King_; _Guinevere_.

Footnote 453:

  _Ibid._ To the Queen.

Footnote 454:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book I, chap. X.

Footnote 455:

  Gresholm Island, the scene of "The Entertaining of the Noble Head".

Footnote 456:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XX, chap. VIII.

Footnote 457:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. III.

Footnote 458:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book I, chap. VIII.

Footnote 459:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. XVI.

Footnote 460:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote 461:

  _Ibid._, Book IV, chap. IV.

Footnote 462:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. XXIV.

Footnote 463:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote 464:

  _Ibid._, Book II, chap. XVIII.

Footnote 465:

  _Ibid._, Book V, chap. II; Book VIII, chap. IV; Book XIX, chap. XI.

Footnote 466:

  _Ibid._, Book XI, chap. II.

Footnote 467:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XI, chap. II.

Footnote 468:

  _Ibid._, Book XVII, chap. V.

Footnote 469:

  _Ibid._, Book XI, chap. II.

Footnote 470:

  _Ibid._, Book XII, chap. V.

Footnote 471:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 283.

Footnote 472:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book IV, chap. XXIII.

Footnote 473:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 284 and note.

Footnote 474:

  The subject is treated at length by Professor Rhys in his _Arthurian
  Legend_, chap. XII-"Pwyll and Pelles".

Footnote 475:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book II, chap. XV.

Footnote 476:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book I, chap. XII.

Footnote 477:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. XV.

Footnote 478:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. IX.

Footnote 479:

  _Ibid._, Book XIII, chap. XII.

Footnote 480:

  _Ibid._, Book XIX, chap. XI.

Footnote 481:

  _Ibid._, Book XIX, chap. II.

Footnote 482:

  _Ibid._, Book XIII, chap. X.

Footnote 483:

  _Ibid._, Book XIV, chap. IV.

Footnote 484:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XIV, chap. IV.

Footnote 485:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 11.

Footnote 486:

  _Op. cit._, pp. 21-22.

Footnote 487:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book IV, chap. XVIII.

Footnote 488:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. VIII.

Footnote 489:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 23.

Footnote 490:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book IV, chap. I.

Footnote 491:

  See chap. XVII-"The Adventures of the Gods of Hades".

Footnote 492:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book IV, chap. I.

Footnote 493:

  _Ibid._, Book I, chap. II.

Footnote 494:

  _Ibid._, Book III, chap. XV.

Footnote 495:

  Whose story is told by Tennyson in the _Idylls_, and by Malory in Book
  XVIII of the _Morte Darthur_.

Footnote 496:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XI, chaps. II and III.

Footnote 497:

  See his _Studies in the Arthurian Legend_.

Footnote 498:

  See chap. XXI-"The Mythological Coming of Arthur'".

Footnote 499:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XIX, chaps. I-IX.

Footnote 500:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XVII, chap. XX.

Footnote 501:

  _Ibid._, Book II, chap. XVI; Book XI, chap. XIV.

Footnote 502:

  See chap. V-"The Gods of the Gaels".

Footnote 503:

  See chap. XVIII-"The Wooing of Branwen and the Beheading of Brn".

Footnote 504:

  See chap. XXI-"The Mythological Coming of Arthur'".

Footnote 505:

  See chap. XII-"The Irish Iliad".

Footnote 506:

  Chap. XXI-"The Mythological Coming of Arthur'".

Footnote 507:

  Chap. XXI-"The Mythological Coming of Arthur'".

Footnote 508:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 305.

Footnote 509:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XI, chaps. II and IV.

Footnote 510:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XVI, chap. V.

Footnote 511:

  _Ibid._, Book XI, chap. XIV; Book XII, chap. IV; Book XIII, chap.
  XVIII.

Footnote 512:

  Not mentioned by Malory, but stated in the romance called _Seint
  Greal_.

Footnote 513:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, pp. 276-277; 302.

Footnote 514:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book IV, chap. XXIX.

Footnote 515:

  _Ibid._, Book XVII, chap. XX, in which Sir Bors, Sir Percivale, and
  Sir Galahad are all fed from the Sangreal.

Footnote 516:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 162.

Footnote 517:

  _Ibid._, p. 133.

Footnote 518:

  Translated by Lady Guest in her _Mabinogion_, under the title of
  _Peredur, the Son of Evrawc_.

Footnote 519:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 169. But see whole of chap. VIII-"Galahad
  and Gwalchaved".

Footnote 520:

  The German romance _Diu Krne_, by Heinrich von dem Trlin.

Footnote 521:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, p. 71.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XXIV

                    THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE GODS


If there be love of fame in celestial minds, those gods might count
themselves fortunate who shared in the transformation of Arthur. Their
divinity had fallen from them, but in their new rles, as heroes of
romance, they entered upon vivid reincarnations. The names of Arthur's
Knights might almost be described as "household words", while the gods
who had no portion in the Table Round are known only to those who busy
themselves with antiquarian lore. It is true that a few folk-tales still
survive in the remoter parts of Wales, in which the names of such
ancient British deities as Gwydion, Gwyn, Arianrod, and Dylan appear,
but it is in such a chaos of jumbled and distorted legend that one finds
it hard to pick out even the slenderest thread of story. They have none
of the definite coherence of the contemporary Gaelic folk-tales quoted
in a previous chapter as still preserving the myths about Goibniu, Lugh,
Cian, Manannn, Ethniu, and Balor. Indeed, they have reached such a
stage of disintegration that they can hardly now survive another
generation.[522]

There have been, however, other paths by which the fame of a god might
descend to a posterity which would no longer credit his divinity. The
rolls of early British history were open to welcome any number of
mythical personages, provided that their legends were attractive.
Geoffrey of Monmouth's famous _Historia Britonum_ is, under its grave
pretence of exact history, as mythological as the Morte Darthur, or even
the Mabinogion. The annals of early British saintship were not less
accommodating. A god whose tradition was too potent to be ignored or
extinguished was canonized, as a matter of course, by clerics who held
as an axiom that "the toleration of the cromlech facilitated the
reception of the Gospel.[523]" Only the most irreconcilable escaped
them-such a one as Gwyn son of Nudd, who, found almost useless by
Geoffrey and intractable by the monkish writers, remains the last
survivor of the old gods-dwindled to the proportions of a fairy, but
unsubdued.

This part of resistance is perhaps the most dignified; for deities can
be sadly changed by the caprices of their euhemerizers. Dn, whom we
knew as the mother of the heaven gods, seems strangely described as a
_king_ of Lochlin and Dublin, who led the Irish into north Wales in A.D.
267.[524] More recognizable is _his_ son Gwydion, who introduced the
knowledge of letters into the country of his adoption. The dynasty of
"King" Dn, according to a manuscript in the collection of Mr. Edward
Williams-better known under his bardic name of Iolo Morganwg-held north
Wales for a hundred and twenty-nine years, when the North British king,
Cunedda, invaded the country, defeated the Irish in a great battle, and
drove them across sea to the Isle of Man. This battle is historical,
and, putting Dn and Gwydion out of the question, probably represented
the last stand of the Gael, in the extreme west of Britain, against the
second and stronger wave of Celtic invasion. In the same collection of
_Iolo Manuscripts_ is found a curious, and even comic, euhemeristic
version of the strange myth of the Bone Prison of Oeth and Anoeth which
Manawyddan son of Llyr, built in Gower. The new reading makes that
ghastly abode a real building, constructed out of the bones of the
"Caesarians" (Romans) killed in battle with the Cymri. It consisted of
numerous chambers, some of large bones and some of small, some above
ground and some under. Prisoners of war were placed in the more
comfortable cells, the underground dungeons being kept for traitors to
their country. Several times the "Caesarians" demolished the prison,
but, each time, the Cymri rebuilt it stronger than before. At last,
however, the bones decayed, and, being spread upon the ground, made an
excellent manure! "From that time forth" the people of the neighbourhood
"had astonishing crops of wheat and barley and of every other grain for
many years".[525]

It is not, however, in these, so to speak, unauthorized narratives that
we can best refind our British deities, but in the compact, coherent,
and at times almost convincing _Historia Britonum_ of Geoffrey of
Monmouth, published in the first half of the twelfth century, and for
hundreds of years gravely quoted as the leading authority on the early
history of our islands. The modern critical spirit has, of course,
relegated it to the region of fable. We can no longer accept the
pleasant tradition of the descent of the Britons from the survivors of
Troy, led westward in search of a new home by Brutus, the great-grandson
of the pious neas. Nor indeed does any portion of the "History", from
neas to Athelstan, quite persuade the latter-day reader. Its kings
succeed one another in plausible sequence, but they themselves are too
obviously the heroes of popular legend.

A large part of Geoffrey's chronicle-two books[526] out of twelve-is, of
course, devoted to Arthur. In it he tells the story of that paladin's
conquests, not only in his own country, against the Saxons, the Irish,
the Scots, and the Picts, but over all western Europe. We see the
British champion, after annexing Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, and the
Orkneys, following up these minor victories by subduing Norway, Dacia
(by which Denmark seems to have been meant), Aquitaine, and Gaul. After
such triumphs there was clearly nothing left for him but the overthrow
of the Roman empire; and this he had practically achieved when the
rebellion of Mordred brought him home to his death, or rather (for even
Geoffrey does not quite lose hold of the belief in the undying Arthur)
to be carried to the island of Avallon to be healed of his wounds, the
crown of Britain falling to "his kinsman Constantine, the son of Cador,
Duke of Cornwall, in the five hundred and forty-second year of our
Lord's incarnation".[527] Upon the more personal incidents connected
with Arthur, Geoffrey openly professes to keep silence, possibly
regarding them as not falling within the province of his history, but we
are told shortly how Mordred took advantage of Arthur's absence on the
Continent to seize the throne, marry Guanhamara (Guinevere), and ally
himself with the Saxons, only to be defeated at that fatal battle called
by Geoffrey "Cambula", in which Mordred, Arthur, and Walgan-the "Sir
Gawain" of Malory and the Gwalchmei of the earlier legends-all met their
dooms.

We find the gods of the older generation standing in the same position
with regard to Arthur in Geoffrey's "History" as they do in the later
Welsh triads and tales. Though rulers, they are yet his vassals. In
"three brothers of royal blood", called Lot, Urian, and Augusel, who are
represented as having been chiefs in the north, we may discern Lludd,
Urien, and Arawn. To these three Arthur restored "the rights of their
ancestors", handing over the semi-sovereignty of Scotland to Augusel,
giving Urian the government of Murief (Moray), and re-establishing Lot
"in the consulship of Loudonesia (Lothian), and the other provinces
belonging to him".[528] Two other rulers subject to him are Gunvasius,
King of the Orkneys, and Malvasius, King of Iceland,[529] in whom we
recognize Gwyn, under Latinized forms of his Welsh name Gwynwas and his
Cornish name Melwas. But it is characteristic of Geoffrey of Monmouth's
loose hold upon his materials that, not content with having connected
several of these gods with Arthur's period, he further endows them with
reigns of their own. "Urien" was Arthur's vassal, but "Urianus" was
himself King of Britain centuries before Arthur was born.[530] Lud (that
is, Lludd) succeeded his father Beli.[531] We hear nothing of his silver
hand, but we learn that he was "famous for the building of cities, and
for rebuilding the walls of Trinovantum[532], which he also surrounded
with innumerable towers ... and though he had many other cities, yet he
loved this above them all, and resided in it the greater part of the
year; for which reason it was afterwards called Kaerlud, and by the
corruption of the word, Caerlondon; and again by change of languages, in
process of time, London; as also by foreigners who arrived here, and
reduced this country under their subjection, it was called Londres. At
last, when he was dead, his body was buried by the gate which to this
time is called in the British tongue after his name Parthlud, and in the
Saxon, Ludesgata." He was succeeded by his brother, Cassibellawn
(Cassivelaunus), during whose reign Julius Caesar first invaded Britain.

Lludd, however, is not entirely dependent upon Geoffrey of Monmouth for
his reputation as a king of Britain. One of the old Welsh romances,[533]
translated by Lady Charlotte Guest in her Mabinogion, relates the
rebuilding of London by Lludd in almost the same words as Geoffrey. The
story which these pseudo-historical details introduce is, however, an
obviously mythological one. It tells us how, in the days of Lludd,
Britain was oppressed by three plagues. The first was the arrival of a
strange race of sorcerers called the "Coranians",[534] who had three
qualities which made them unpopular; they paid their way in "fairy
money", which, though apparently real, returned afterwards-like the
shields, horses, and hounds made by Gwydion son of Dn, to deceive
Pryderi-into the fungus out of which it had been charmed by magic; they
could hear everything that was said over the whole of Britain, in
however low a tone, provided only that the wind met it; and they could
not be injured by any weapon. The second was "a shriek that came on
every May eve, over every hearth in the Island of Britain, and went
through people's hearts and so scared them that the men lost their hue
and their strength, and the women their children, and the young men and
the maidens their senses, and all the animals and trees and the earth
and the waters were left barren". The third was a disappearance of the
food hoarded in the king's palace, which was so complete that a year's
provisions vanished in a single night, and so mysterious that no one
could ever find out its cause.

By the advice of his nobles, Lludd went to France to obtain the help of
its king, his brother Llevelys, who was "a man great of counsel and
wisdom". In order to be able to consult with his brother without being
overheard by the Coranians, Llevelys caused a long tube of brass to be
made, through which they talked to one another. The sorcerer tribe,
however, got to know of it, and, though they could not hear what was
being said inside the speaking-tube, they sent a demon into it, who
whispered insulting messages up and down it, as though from one brother
to the other. But Lludd and Llevelys knew one another too well to be
deceived by this, and they drove the demon out of the tube by flooding
it with wine. Then Llevelys told Lludd to take certain insects, which he
would give him, and pound them in water. When the water was sufficiently
permeated with their essence, he was to call both his own people and the
Coranians together, as though for a conference, and, in the midst of the
meeting, to cast it over all of them alike. The water, though harmless
to his own people, would nevertheless prove a deadly poison to the
Coranians.

As for the shriek, Llevelys explained it to be raised by a dragon. This
monster was the Red Dragon of Britain, and it raised the shriek because
it was being attacked by the White Dragon of the Saxons, which was
trying to overcome and destroy it. The French king told his brother to
measure the length and breadth of Britain, and, when he had found the
exact centre of the island, to cause a pit to be dug there. In this pit
was to be placed a vessel containing the best mead that could be made,
with a covering of satin over it to hide it. Lludd was then to watch
from some safe place. The dragons would appear and fight in the air
until they were exhausted, then they would fall together on to the top
of the satin cloth, and so draw it down with them into the vessel full
of mead. Naturally they would drink the mead, and, equally naturally,
they would then sleep. As soon as Lludd was sure that they were
helpless, he was to go to the pit, wrap the satin cloth round both of
them, and bury them together in a stone coffin in the strongest place in
Britain. If this were safely done, there would be no more heard of the
shriek.

And the disappearance of the food was caused by "a mighty man of magic",
who put everyone to sleep by charms before he removed the king's
provisions. Lludd was to watch for him, sitting by the side of a
cauldron full of cold water. As often as he felt the approach of
drowsiness, he was to plunge into the cauldron. Thus he would be able to
keep awake and frustrate the thief.

So Lludd came back to Britain. He pounded the insects in the water, and
then summoned both the men of Britain and the Coranians to a meeting. In
the midst of it, he sprinkled the water over everyone alike. The natives
took no harm from this mythological "beetle powder", but the Coranians
died.

Lludd was then ready to deal with the dragons. His careful measurements
proved that the centre of the island of Britain was at Oxford, and there
he caused the pit to be dug, with the vessel of mead in it, hidden by
the satin covering. Having made everything ready, he watched, and soon
saw the dragons appear. For a long time they fought desperately in the
air; then they fell down together on to the satin cloth, and, drawing it
after them, subsided into the mead. Lludd waited till they were quite
silent, and then pulled them out, folded them carefully in the wrapping,
and took them to the district of Snowdon, where he buried them in the
strong fortress whose remains, near Beddgelert, are still called "Dinas
Emrys". After this the terrible shriek was not heard again until Merlin
had them dug up, five hundred years later, when they recommenced
fighting, and the red dragon drove the white one out of Britain.

Last of all, Lludd prepared a great banquet in his hall, and watched
over it, armed, with the cauldron of water near him. In the middle of
the night, he heard soft, drowsy music, such as nearly put him to sleep;
but he kept awake by repeatedly dipping himself in the cold water. Just
before dawn a huge man, clad in armour, came into the hall, carrying a
basket, which he began to load with the viands on the table. Like the
bag in which Pwyll captured Gwawl, its holding capacity seemed endless.
However, the man filled it at last, and was carrying it out, when Lludd
stopped him. They fought, and Lludd conquered the man of magic, and made
him his vassal. Thus the "Three Plagues of Britain" came to an end.

Lludd, in changing from god to king, seems to have lost most of his old
mythological attributes. Even his daughter Creudylad is taken from him
and given to another of the ancient British deities. Why Lludd, the
sky-god, should have been confounded with Llyr, the sea-god, is not very
apparent, but it is certain that "Creudylad" of the early Welsh legends
and poems is the same as Geoffrey's "Cordeilla" and Shakespeare's
"Cordelia". The great dramatist was ultimately indebted to the Celtic
mythology for the groundwork of the legend which he wove into the tragic
story of _King Lear_. "Leir", as Geoffrey calls him,[535] was the son of
Bladud, who built Caer Badus (Bath), and perished, like Icarus, as the
result of an accident with a flying-machine of his own invention. Having
no sons, but three daughters, Gonorilla, Regan, and Cordeilla, he
thought in his old age of dividing his kingdom among them. But, first of
all, he decided to make trial of their affection for him, with the idea
of giving the best portions of his realm to the most worthy. Gonorilla,
the eldest, replied to his question of how much she loved him, "that she
called heaven to witness, she loved him more than her own soul". Regan
answered "with an oath, that she could not otherwise express her
thoughts, but that she loved him above all creatures'". But when it came
to Cordeilla's turn, the youngest daughter, disgusted with her sisters'
hypocrisy, spoke after a quite different fashion. "My father,' said
she, is there any daughter that can love her father more than duty
requires? In my opinion, whoever pretends to it, must disguise her real
sentiments under the veil of flattery. I have always loved you as a
father, nor do I yet depart from my purposed duty; and if you insist to
have something more extorted from me, hear now the greatness of my
affection, which I always bear you, and take this for a short answer to
all your questions; look how much you have, so much is your value, and
so much do I love you.'" Her enraged father immediately bestowed his
kingdom upon his two other daughters, marrying them to the two highest
of his nobility, Gonorilla to Maglaunus, Duke of Albania[536], and Regan
to Henuinus, Duke of Cornwall. To Cordeilla he not only refused a share
in his realm, but even a dowry. Aganippus, King of the Franks, married
her, however, for her beauty alone.

Once in possession, Leir's two sons-in-law rebelled against him, and
deprived him of all regal authority. The sole recompense for his lost
power was an agreement by Maglaunus to allow him maintenance, with a
body-guard of sixty soldiers. But, after two years, the Duke of Albania,
at his wife Gonorilla's instigation, reduced them to thirty. Resenting
this, Leir left Maglaunus, and went to Henuinus, the husband of Regan.
The Duke of Cornwall at first received him honourably, but, before a
year was out, compelled him to discharge all his attendants except five.
This sent him back in a rage to his eldest daughter, who, this time,
swore that he should not stay with her, unless he would be satisfied
with one serving-man only. In despair, Leir resolved to throw himself
upon the mercy of Cordeilla, and, full of contrition for the way he had
treated her, and of misgivings as to how he might be received, took ship
for Gaul.

Arriving at Karitia[537], he sent a messenger to his daughter, telling
her of his plight and asking for her help. Cordeilla sent him money,
robes, and a retinue of forty men, and, as soon as he was fully equipped
with the state suitable to a king, he was received in pomp by Aganippus
and his ministers, who gave the government of Gaul into his hands until
his own kingdom could be restored to him. This the king of the Franks
did by raising an army and invading Britain. Maglaunus and Henuinus were
routed, and Leir replaced on the throne, after which he lived three
years. Cordeilla, succeeding to the government of Britain, "buried her
father in a certain vault, which she ordered to be made for him under
the River Sore, in Leicester ("Llyr-cestre"), and which had been built
originally under the ground to the honour of the god Janus. And here all
the workmen of the city, upon the anniversary solemnity of that
festival, used to begin their yearly labours."

Exactly what myth is retold in this history of Leir and his three
daughters we are hardly likely ever to discover. But its mythological
nature is clear enough in the light of the description of the
underground temple dedicated to Llyr, at once the god of the subaqueous,
and therefore subterranean, world and a British Dis Pater, connected
with the origin of things, like the Roman god Janus, with whom he was
apparently identified.[538]

Ten kings or so after this (for any more exact way of measuring the
flight of time is absent from Geoffrey's _History_) we recognize two
other British gods upon the scene. Brennius (that is, Brn) disputes the
kingdom with his brother Belinus. Clearly this is a version of the
ancient myth of the twin brothers, Darkness and Light, which we have
seen expressed in so many ways in Celtic mythology. Brn, the god of
death and the underworld, is opposed to Belinus, god of the sun and
health. In the original, lost myth, probably they alternately conquered
and were conquered-a symbol of the alternation of night and day and of
winter and summer. In Geoffrey's _History_[539], they divided Britain,
Belinus taking "the crown of the island with the dominions of Loegria,
Kambria, and Cornwall, because, according to the Trojan constitution,
the right of inheritance would come to him as the elder", while
Brennius, as the younger, had "Northumberland, which extended from the
River Humber to Caithness". But flatterers persuaded Brennius to ally
himself with the King of the Norwegians, and attack Belinus. A battle
was fought, in which Belinus was conqueror, and Brennius escaped to
Gaul, where he married the daughter of the Duke of the Allobroges, and
on that ruler's death was declared successor to the throne. Thus firmly
established with an army, he invaded Britain again. Belinus marched with
the whole strength of the kingdom to meet him, and the armies were
already drawn out opposite to one another in battle array when Conwenna,
the mother of the two kings, succeeded in reconciling them. Not having
one another to fight with, the brothers now agreed upon a joint
expedition with their armies into Gaul. The Britons and the Allobroges
conquered all the other kings of the Franks, and then entered Italy,
destroying villages and cities as they marched to Rome. Gabius and
Porsena, the Roman consuls, bought them off with large presents of gold
and silver and the promise of a yearly tribute, whereupon Brennius and
Belinus withdrew their army into Germany and began to devastate it. But
the Romans, now no longer taken by surprise and unprepared, came to the
help of the Germans. This brought Brennius and Belinus back to Rome,
which, after a long siege, they succeeded in taking. Brennius remained
in Italy, "where he exercised unheard-of tyranny over the people"; and
one may take the whole of this veracious history to be due to a
patriotic desire to make out the Brennus of "Vae Victis" fame-who
actually did sack Rome, in B.C. 390-a Briton. Belinus, the other
brother, returned to England. "He made a gate of wonderful structure in
Trinovantum, upon the bank of the Thames, which the citizens call after
his name Billingsgate to this day. Over it he built a prodigiously large
tower, and under it a haven or quay for ships.... At last, when he had
finished his days, his body was burned, and the ashes put up in a golden
urn, which they placed at Trinovantum, with wonderful art, on the top of
the tower above mentioned." He was succeeded by Gurgiunt Brabtruc,[540]
who, as he was returning by way of the Orkneys from a raid on the Danes,
met the ships of Partholon and his people as they came from Spain to
settle in Ireland.[541]

Llyr and his children, large as they bulk in mythical history, were
hardly less illustrious as saints. The family of Llyr Llediath is always
described by the early Welsh hagiologists as the first of the "Three
chief Holy Families of the Isle of Britain". The glory of Llyr himself,
however, is but a reflected one; for it was his son Brn "the Blessd"
who actually introduced Christianity into Britain. Legend tells us that
he was taken captive to Rome with his son Caradawc (who was identified
for the purpose with the historical Caratacus), and the rest of his
family, and remained there seven years, during which time he became
converted to the Gospel, and spread it enthusiastically on his return.
Neither his son Caradawc nor his half-brother Manawyddan exactly
followed in his footsteps, but their descendants did. Caradawc's sons
were all saintly, while his daughter Eigen, who married a chief called
Sarrlog, lord of Caer Sarrlog (Old Sarum), was the first female saint in
Britain. Manawyddan's side of the family was less adaptable. His son and
his grandson were both pagans, but his great-grandson obtained Christian
fame as St. Dyfan, who was sent as a bishop to Wales by Pope
Eleutherius, and was martyred at Merthyr Dyvan. After this, the saintly
line of Llyr increases and flourishes. Singularly inappropriate persons
are found in it-Mabon, the Gallo-British Apollo, as well as Geraint and
others of King Arthur's court.[542]

It is so quaint a conceit that Christianity should have been, like
all other things, the gift of the Celtic Hades, that it seems almost
a pity to cast doubt on it. The witness of the classical historians
sums up, however, dead in its disfavour. Tacitus carefully
enumerates the family of Caratacus, and describes how he and his
wife, daughter, and brother were separately interviewed by the
Emperor Claudius, but makes no mention at all of the chieftain's
supposed father Brn. Moreover, Dio Cassius gives the name of
Caratacus's father as Cunobelinus-Shakespeare's "Cymbeline"-who, he
adds, had died before the Romans first invaded Britain. The evidence
is wholly against Brn as a Christian pioneer. He remains the grim
old god of war and death, "blessd" only to his pagan votaries, and
especially to the bards, who probably first called him _Bendigeid
Vran_, and whose stubborn adherence must have been the cause of the
not less stubborn efforts of their enemies, the Christian clerics,
to bring him over to their own side by canonization.[543]

They had an easier task with Brn's sister, Branwen of the "Fair Bosom".
Goddesses, indeed, seem to have stood the process better than
gods-witness "Saint" Brigit, the "Mary of the Gael". The British
Aphrodit became, under the name of Brynwyn, or Dwynwen, a patron saint
of lovers. As late as the fourteenth century, her shrine at Llandwynwyn,
in Anglesey, was the favourite resort of the disappointed of both sexes,
who came to pray to her image for either success or forgetfulness. To
make the result the more certain, the monks of the church sold Lethean
draughts from her sacred well. The legend told of her is that, having
vowed herself to perpetual celibacy, she fell in love with a young chief
called Maelon. One night, as she was praying for guidance in her
difficulty, she had a vision in which she was offered a goblet of
delicious liquor as a draught of oblivion, and she also saw the same
sweet medicine given to Maelon, whom it at once froze into a block of
ice. She was then, for her faith, offered the granting of three boons.
The first she chose was that Maelon might be allowed to resume his
natural form and temperature; the second, that she should no longer
desire to be married; and the third, that her intercessions might be
granted for all true-hearted lovers, so that they should either wed the
objects of their affection or be cured of their passion.[544] From this
cause came the virtues of her shrine and fountain. But the modern
generation no longer flocks there, and the efficacious well is choked
with sand. None the less, she whom the Welsh bards called the "Saint of
Love"[545] still has her occasional votaries. Country girls of the
neighbourhood seek her help when all else fails. The water nearest to
the church is thought to be the best substitute for the now dry and
ruined original well.[546]

A striking contrast to this easy victory over paganism is the stubborn
resistance to Christian adoption of Gwyn son of Nudd. It is true that he
was once enrolled by some monk in the train of the "Blessd Brn",[547]
but it was done in so half-hearted a way that, even now, one can discern
that the writer felt almost ashamed of himself. His fame as at least a
powerful fairy was too vital to be thus tampered with. Even Spenser,
though, in his _Faerie Queene_, he calls him "the good Sir Guyon ... in
whom great rule of Temp'raunce goodly doth appeare",[548] does not
attempt to conceal his real nature. It is no man, but

                  "an Elfin born, of noble state
              And mickle worship in his native land",[549]

who sets forth the beauties of that virtue for which the original Celtic
paradise, with its unfailing ale and rivers of mead and wine, would
hardly seem to have been the best possible school. Save for Spenser, all
authorities agree in making Gwyn the determined opponent of things
Christian. A curious and picturesque legend[550] is told of him in
connection with St. Collen, who was himself the great-grandson of Brn's
son, Caradawc. The saint, desirous of still further retirement from the
world, had made himself a cell beneath a rock near Glastonbury Tor, in
Gwyn's own "island of Avilion". It was close to a road, and one day he
heard two men pass by talking about Gwyn son of Nudd, and declaring him
to be King of Annwn and the fairies. St. Collen put his head out of the
cell, and told them to hold their tongues, and that Gwyn and his fairies
were only demons. The two men retorted by warning the saint that he
would soon have to meet the dark ruler face to face. They passed on, and
not long afterwards St. Collen heard someone knocking at his door. On
asking who was there, he got the answer: "I am here, the messenger of
Gwyn ap Nudd, King of Hades, to bid thee come by the middle of the day
to speak with him on the top of the hill." The saint did not go; and the
messenger came a second time with the same message. On the third visit,
he added a threat that, if St. Collen did not come now, it would be the
worse for him. So, a little disquieted, he went, but not unarmed. He
consecrated some water, and took it with him.

On other days the top of Glastonbury Tor had always been bare, but on
this occasion the saint found it crowned by a splendid castle. Men and
maidens, beautifully dressed, were going in and out. A page received him
and told him that the king was waiting for him to be his guest at
dinner. St. Collen found Gwyn sitting on a golden chair in front of a
table covered with the rarest dainties and wines. He invited him to
share them, adding that if there was anything he especially liked, it
should be brought to him with all honour. "I do not eat the leaves of
trees," replied the saint, who knew what fairy meats and drinks were
made of. Not taken aback by this discourteous answer, the King of Annwn
genially asked the saint if he did not admire his servants' livery,
which was a motley costume, red on one side and blue on the other.
"Their dress is good enough for its kind," said St. Collen. "What kind
is that?" asked Gwyn. "The red shows which side is being scorched, and
the blue shows which side is being frozen," replied the saint, and,
splashing his holy water all round him, he saw castle, serving-men, and
king vanish, leaving him alone on the bare, windy hill-top.

Gwyn, last of the gods of Annwn, has evidently by this time taken over
the functions of all the others. He has the hounds which Arawn once
had-the _Cwn Annwn_, "dogs of hell", with the white bodies and the red
ears. We hear more of them in folklore than we do of their master,
though even their tradition is dying out with the spread of newspapers
and railways. We are not likely to find another Reverend Edmund
Jones[551] to insist upon belief in them, lest, by closing our minds to
such manifest witnesses of the supernatural world, we should become
infidels. Still, we may even now find peasants ready to swear that they
have heard them sweeping along the hill-sides upon stormy nights, as
they pursued the flying souls of unshriven men or unbaptized babes. The
tales told of them agree curiously. Their cry is like that of a pack of
foxhounds, but softer in tone. The nearer they are to a man, the less
loud their voices seem, and the farther off they are, the louder. But
they are less often seen than heard, and it has been suggested that the
sounds were the cries of migrating bean-geese, which are not unlike
those of hounds in chase. The superstition is widely spread. The _Cwn
Annwn_ of Wales are called in North Devon the "Yeth" (Heath or Heathen),
or "Yell" Hounds, and on Dartmoor, the "Wish" Hounds. In Durham and
Yorkshire they are called "Gabriel" Hounds, and they are known by
various names in Norfolk, Gloucestershire, and Cornwall. In Scotland it
is Arthur who leads the Wild Hunt, and the tradition is found over
almost the whole of western Europe.

Not many folk-tales have been preserved in which Gwyn is mentioned by
name. His memory has lingered longest and latest in the fairy-haunted
Vale of Neath, so close to his "ridge, the Taw abode ... not the
nearest Taw ... but that Taw which is the farthest". But it may be
understood whenever the king of the fairies is mentioned. As the last of
the greater gods of the old mythology, he has been endowed by popular
fancy with the rule of all the varied fairy population of Britain, so
far, at least, as it is of Celtic or pre-Celtic origin. For some of the
fairies most famous in English literature are Teutonic. King Oberon
derives his name, through the French _fabliaux_, from Elberich, the
dwarf king of the _Niebelungenlied_,[552] though his queen, Titania, was
probably named out of Ovid's _Metamorphoses_.[553] Puck, another of
Shakespeare's fays, is merely the personification of his race, the
"pwccas" of Wales, "pookas" of Ireland, "poakes" of Worcestershire, and
"pixies" of the West of England.[554] It is Wales that at the present
time preserves the most numerous and diverse collection of fairies. Some
of them are beautiful, some hideous; some kindly, some malevolent. There
are the gentle damsels of the lakes and streams called Gwragedd Annwn,
and the fierce and cruel mountain fairies known as the Gwyllion. There
are the household sprites called Bwbachod, like the Scotch and English
"brownies"; the Coblynau, or gnomes of the mines (called "knockers" in
Cornwall); and the Ellyllon, or elves, of whom the pwccas are a
branch.[555] In the North of England the spirits belong more wholly to
the lower type. The bogles, brownies, killmoulis, redcaps, and their
like seem little akin to the higher, Aryan-seeming fairies. The Welsh
bwbach, too, is described as brown and hairy, and the coblynau as black
or copper-faced. We shall hardly do wrong in regarding such spectres as
the degraded gods of a pre-Aryan race, like the Irish leprechauns and
pookas, who have nothing in common with the still beautiful, still noble
figures of the Tuatha D Danann.

Of these numberless and nameless subjects of Gwyn, some dwell beneath
the earth or under the surface of lakes-which seem to take, in Wales,
the place of the Gaelic "fairy hills"-and others in Avilion, a
mysterious western isle of all delights lying on or just beneath the
sea. Pembrokeshire-the ancient Dyfed-has kept the tradition most
completely. The story goes that there is a certain square yard in the
hundred of Cemmes in that county which holds the secret of the fairy
realm. If a man happens to set his feet on it by chance, his eyes are
opened, and he can see that which is hidden from other men-the fairy
country and commonwealth,-but, the moment he moves from the enchanted
spot, he loses the vision, and he can never find the same place
again.[556] That country is upon the sea, and not far from shore; like
the Irish paradise of which it is the counterpart, it may sometimes be
sighted by sailors. The "Green Meadows of Enchantment" are still an
article of faith among Pembrokeshire and Caermarthenshire sailors, and
evidently not without some reason. In 1896 a correspondent of the
_Pembroke County Guardian_ sent in a report made to him by a certain
Captain John Evans to the effect that, one summer morning, while
trending up the Channel, and passing Gresholm Island (the scene of the
entertaining of Brn's head), in what he had always known as deep water,
he was surprised to see to windward of him a large tract of land covered
with a beautiful green meadow. It was not, however, above water, but two
or three feet below it, so that the grass waved or swam about as the
ripple floated over it, in a way that made one who watched it feel
drowsy. Captain Evans had often heard of the tradition of the fairy
island from old people, but admitted that he had never hoped to see it
with his own eyes.[557] As with the "Hounds of Annwn" one may suspect a
quite natural explanation. Mirage is at once common enough and rare
enough on our coasts to give rise to such a legend, and it must have
been some such phenomenon as the "Fata Morgana" of Sicily which has made
sober men swear so confidently to ocular evidence of the Celtic
Paradise, whether seen from the farthest western coasts of Gaelic
Ireland or Scotland, or of British Wales.

-----

Footnote 522:

  See, for example, a folk-tale, pp. 117-123 in Rhys's _Celtic
  Folklore_.

Footnote 523:

  Stephens's Preliminary Dissertation to his translation of Aneurin's
  _Gododin_.

Footnote 524:

  _Iolo MSS._, p. 471.

Footnote 525:

  _Iolo MSS._, pp. 597-600.

Footnote 526:

  _Historia Britonum_, Books IX, X, and chaps. I and II of XI.

Footnote 527:

  _Historia Britonum_, Book XI, chap. II.

Footnote 528:

  _Ibid._, Book IX, chap. IX.

Footnote 529:

  _Ibid._, Book IX, chap. _XII_. They appear also as Guanius, King of
  the Huns, and Melga, King of the Picts, in Book V, chap. XVI.

Footnote 530:

  _Historia Britonum_, Book III, chap. XIX.

Footnote 531:

  _Ibid._, Book III, chap. XX.

Footnote 532:

  _I.e._ London, under its traditionary earlier name, Troja Nova, given
  it by Brutus.

Footnote 533:

  _The Story of Lludd and Llevelys._

Footnote 534:

  The name means "dwarfs". Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 606.

Footnote 535:

  _Historia Britonum_, Book II, chap, X-XIV.

Footnote 536:

  Alba, or North Britain.

Footnote 537:

  Now Calais.

Footnote 538:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, pp. 131-132.

Footnote 539:

  _Historia Britonum_, Book III, chaps. I-X.

Footnote 540:

  The same fabulous personage, perhaps, as the original of Rabelais'
  Gargantua, a popular Celtic god.

Footnote 541:

  _Historia Britonum_, Book III, Chaps. XI-XII.

Footnote 542:

  See the _Iolo MSS._ The genealogies and families of the saints of the
  island of Britain. Copied by Iolo Morganwg in 1783 from the _Long Book
  of Thomas Truman of Pantlliwydd_ in the parish of Llansanor in
  Glamorgan, p. 515, &c. Also see _An Essay on the Welsh Saints_ by the
  Rev. Rice Rees, Sections IV and V.

Footnote 543:

  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, pp. 261-262.

Footnote 544:

  _Iolo MSS._, p. 474.

Footnote 545:

  "The Welsh bards call Dwynwen the goddess, or saint of love and
  affection, as the poets designate Venus." _Iolo MSS._

Footnote 546:

  Wirt Sikes: _British Goblins_, p. 350.

Footnote 547:

  _Iolo MSS._, p. 523.

Footnote 548:

  _The Faerie Queene_, Prologue to Book II.

Footnote 549:

  _Ibid._, Book II, canto I, verse 6.

Footnote 550:

  Published in _Y Greal_ (London, 1805), and is to be found quoted in
  Rhys: _Arthurian Legend_, pp. 338, 339; also in Sikes: _British
  Goblins_, pp. 7-8.

Footnote 551:

  _A Relation of Apparitions of Spirits in the County of Monmouth and
  the Principality of Wales._ Published at Newport, 1813.

Footnote 552:

  Thistleton Dyer: _Folklore of Shakespeare_, p. 3.

Footnote 553:

  _Ibid._, p. 4.

Footnote 554:

  _Ibid._, p. 5.

Footnote 555:

  Wirt Sikes: _British Goblins_, p. 12.

Footnote 556:

  The _Brython_, Vol. I, p. 130.

Footnote 557:

  Rhys: _Celtic Folklore_, pp. 171-172.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        SURVIVALS OF THE CELTIC
                                PAGANISM

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XXV

              SURVIVALS OF THE CELTIC PAGANISM INTO MODERN
                                 TIMES


The fall of the Celtic state worship began earlier in Britain than in
her sister island. Neither was it Christianity that struck the first
blow, but the rough humanity and stern justice of the Romans. That
people was more tolerant, perhaps, than any the world has ever known
towards the religions of others, and gladly welcomed the Celtic gods-as
gods-into its own diverse Pantheon. A friendly Gaulish or British
divinity might at any time be granted the so-to-speak divine Roman
citizenship, and be assimilated to Jupiter, to Mars, to Apollo, or to
any other properly accredited deity whom the Romans deemed him to
resemble. It was not against the god, but against his worship at the
hands of his priests, that Roman law struck. The colossal human
sacrifices of the druids horrified even a people who were far from
squeamish about a little bloodshed. They themselves had abolished such
practices by a decree of the senate before Caesar first invaded
Britain,[558] and could not therefore permit within their empire a cult
which slaughtered men in order to draw omens from their
death-agonies.[559] Druidism was first required to be renounced by those
who claimed Roman citizenship; then it was vigorously put down among the
less civilized tribes. Tacitus tells us how the Island of Mona
(Anglesey)-the great stronghold of druidism-was attacked, its sacred
groves cut down, its altars laid level, and its priests put to the
sword.[560] Pliny, recording how the Emperor Tiberius had "suppressed
the druids", congratulates his fellow-countrymen on having put an end,
wherever their dominion extended, to the monstrous customs inspired by
the doctrine that the gods could take pleasure in murder and
cannibalism.[561] The practice of druidism, with its attendant
barbarities, abolished in Britain wherever the long Roman arm could
reach to strike, took refuge beyond the Northern Wall, among the savage
Caledonian tribes who had not yet submitted to the invader's yoke.
Naturally, too, it remained untouched in Ireland. But before the Romans
left Britain, it had been extirpated everywhere, except among "the Picts
and Scots".

Christianity, following the Roman rule, completed the ruin of paganism
in Britain, so far, at least, as its public manifestations were
concerned. In the sixth century of our era, the monkish writer, Gildas,
is able to refer complacently to the ancient British religion as a dead
faith. "I shall not", he says, "enumerate those diabolical idols of my
country, which almost surpassed in number those of Egypt, and of which
we still see some mouldering away within or without the deserted
temples, with stiff and deformed features as was customary. Nor will I
cry out upon the mountains, fountains, or hills, or upon the rivers,
which now are subservient to the use of men, but once were an
abomination and destruction to them, and to which the blind people paid
divine honour."[562] And with the idols fell the priests. The very word
"druid" became obsolete, and is scarcely mentioned in the earliest
British literature, though druids are prominent characters in the Irish
writings of the same period.

The secular arm had no power in Scotland and in Ireland, consequently
the battle between Paganism and Christianity was fought upon more equal
terms, and lasted longer. In the first country, Saint Columba, and in
the second, Saint Patrick are the personages who, at any rate according
to tradition, beat down the druids and their gods. Adamnan, Abbot of
Iona, who wrote his _Vita Columb_ in the last decade of the seventh
century, describes how, a century earlier, that saint had carried the
Gospel to the Picts. Their king, Brude, received him contemptuously, and
the royal druids left no heathen spell unuttered to thwart and annoy
him. But, as the power of Moses was greater than the power of the
magicians of Egypt, so Saint Columba's prayers caused miracles more
wonderful and more convincing than any wrought by his adversaries. Such
stories belong to the atmosphere of myth which has always enveloped
heroic men; the essential fact is that the Picts abandoned the old
religion for the new.

A similar legend sums up the life-work of Saint Patrick in Ireland.
Before he came, Cromm Cruaich had received from time immemorial his
yearly toll of human lives. But Saint Patrick faced the gruesome idol;
as he raised his crozier, we are told, the demon fell shrieking from his
image, which, deprived of its soul, bowed forward to the ground.

It is far easier, however, to overthrow the more public manifestations
of a creed than to destroy its inner vital force. Cromm Cruaich's idol
might fall, but his spirit would survive-a very Proteus. The sacred
places of the ancient Celtic religion might be invaded, the idols and
altars of the gods thrown down, the priests slain, scattered, or
banished, and the cult officially declared to be extinct; but, driven
from the important centres, it would yet survive outside and around
them. The more civilized Gaels and Britons would no doubt accept the
purer gospel, and abandon the gods they had once adored, but the
peasantry-the bulk of the population-would still cling to the familiar
rites and names. A nobler belief and a higher civilization come, after
all, only as surface waves upon the great ocean of human life; beneath
their agitations lies a vast slumbering abyss of half-conscious faith
and thought to which culture penetrates with difficulty and in which
changes come very slowly.

We have already shown how long and how faithfully the Gaelic and Welsh
peasants clung to their old gods, in spite of all the efforts of the
clerics to explain them as ancient kings, to transform them into
wonder-working saints, or to ban them as demons of hell. This
conservative religious instinct of the agricultural populations is not
confined to the inhabitants of the British Islands. The modern Greeks
still believe in nereids, in lamias, in sirens, and in Charon, the dark
ferryman of Hades.[563] The descendants of the Romans and Etruscans hold
that the old Etruscan gods and the Roman deities of the woods and fields
still live in the world as spirits.[564] The high altars of the "Lord of
the Mound" and his terrible kin were levelled, and their golden images
and great temples left to moulder in abandonment; but the rude rustic
shrine to the rude rustic god still received its offerings. It is this
shifting of the care of the pagan cult from chief to peasant, from court
to hovel, and, perhaps, to some extent from higher to lower race, that
serves to explain how the more primitive and uncouth gods have tended so
largely to supplant those of higher, more graceful mien. Aboriginal
deities, thrust into obscurity by the invasion of higher foreign types,
came back to their own again.

For it seems plain that we must divide the spiritual population of the
British Islands into two classes. There is little in common between the
"fairy", strictly so-called, and the unsightly elf who appears under
various names and guises, as pooka, leprechaun, brownie, knocker, or
bogle. The one belongs to such divine tribes as the Tuatha D Danann of
Gaelic myth or their kin, the British gods of the Mabinogion. The other
owes his origin to a quite different, and much lower, kind of
imagination. One might fancy that neolithic man made him in his own
image.

None the less has immemorial tradition wonderfully preserved the
essential features of the Celtic nature-gods. The fairy belief of the
present day hardly differs at all from the conception which the Celts
had of their deities. The description of the Tuatha D Danann in the
"Dialogue of the Elders" as "sprites or fairies with corporeal or
material forms but indued with immortality" would stand as an account of
prevailing ideas as to the "good people" to-day. Nor do the Irish and
Welsh fairies of popular belief differ from one another. Both alike live
among the hills, though in Wales a lake often takes the place of the
"fairy mound"; both, though they war and marry among themselves, are
semi-immortal; both covet the children of men, and will steal them from
the cradle, leaving one of their own uncanny brood in the mortal baby's
stead; both can lay men and women under spells; both delight in music
and the dance, and live lives of unreal and fantastic splendour and
luxury. Another point in which they resemble one another is in their
tiny size. But this would seem to be the result of the literary
convention originated by Shakespeare; in genuine folktales, both Gaelic
and British, the fairies are pictured as of at least mortal
stature.[565]

But, Aryan or Iberian, beautiful or hideous, they are fast vanishing
from belief. Every year, the secluded valleys in which men and women
might still live in the old way, and dream the old dreams, tend more and
more to be thrown open to the modern world of rapid movement and rapid
thought. The last ten years have perhaps done more in this direction
than the preceding ten generations. What lone shepherd or fisherman will
ever see again the vision of the great Manannn? Have the stable-boys of
to-day still any faith left in Finvarra? Is Gwyn ap Nudd often thought
of in his own valleys of the Taw and the Nedd? It would be hard,
perhaps, to find a whole-hearted believer even in his local pooka or
parish bogle.

It is the ritual observances of the old Celtic faith which have better
weathered, and will longer survive, the disintegrating influences of
time. There are no hard names to be remembered. Things may still be done
for "luck" which were once done for religion. Customary observances die
very slowly, held up by an only half acknowledged fear that, unless they
are fulfilled, "something may happen". We shall get, therefore, more
satisfactory evidence of the nature of the Celtic paganism by examining
such customs than in any other way.

We find three forms of the survival of the ancient religion into quite
recent times. The first is the celebration of the old solar or
agricultural festivals of the spring and autumn equinoxes and of the
summer and winter solstices. The second is the practice of a symbolic
human sacrifice by those who have forgotten its meaning, and only know
that they are keeping up an old custom, joined with late instances of
the actual sacrifices of animals to avert cattle-plagues or to change
bad luck. The third consists of many still-living relics of the once
universal worship of sacred waters, trees, stones, and animals.

Whatever may have been the exact meaning of the Celtic state worship,
there seems to be no doubt that it centred around the four great days in
the year which chronicle the rise, progress, and decline of the sun,
and, therefore, of the fruits of the earth. These were: Beltaine, which
fell at the beginning of May; Midsummer Day, marking the triumph of
sunshine and vegetation; the Feast of Lugh, when, in August, the
turning-point of the sun's course had been reached; and the sad Samhain,
when he bade farewell to power, and fell again for half a year under the
sway of the evil forces of winter and darkness.

Of these great solar periods, the first and the last were, naturally,
the most important. The whole Celtic mythology seems to revolve upon
them, as upon pivots. It was on the day of Beltaine that Partholon and
his people, the discoverers, and, indeed, the makers of Ireland, arrived
there from the other world, and it was on the same day, three hundred
years later, that they returned whence they came. It was on Beltaine-day
that the Gaelic gods, the Tuatha D Danann, and, after them, the Gaelic
men, first set foot on Irish soil. It was on the day of Samhain that the
Fomors oppressed the people of Nemed with their terrible tax; and it was
again at Samhain that a later race of gods of light and life finally
conquered those demons at the Battle of Moytura. Only one important
mythological incident-and that was one added at a later time!-happened
upon any other than one of those two days; it was upon Midsummer Day,
one of the lesser solar points, that the people of the goddess Danu took
Ireland from its inhabitants, the Fir Bolgs.

The mythology of Britain preserves the same root-idea as that of
Ireland. If anything uncanny took place, it was sure to be on May-day.
It was on "the night of the first of May" that Rhiannon lost, and
Teirnyon Twryf Vliant found, the infant Pryderi, as told in the first of
the Mabinogion.[566] It was "on every May-eve" that the two dragons
fought and shrieked in the reign of "King" Lludd.[567] It is on "every
first of May" till the day of doom that Gwyn son of Nudd, fights with
Gwyrthur son of Greidawl, for Lludd's fair daughter, Creudylad.[568] And
it was when she was "a-maying" in the woods and fields near Westminster
that the same Gwyn, or Melwas, under his romance-name of Sir
Meliagraunce, captured Arthur's queen, Guinevere.[569]

The nature of the rites performed upon these days can be surmised from
their pale survivals. They are still celebrated by the descendants of
the Celts, though it is probable that few of them know-or would even
care to know-why May Day, St. John's Day, Lammas, and Hallowe'en are
times of ceremony. The first-called "Beltaine" in Ireland, "Bealtiunn"
in Scotland, "Shenn da Boaldyn" in the Isle of Man, and "Galan-Mai" (the
Calends of May) in Wales-celebrates the waking of the earth from her
winter sleep, and the renewal of warmth, life, and vegetation. This is
the meaning of the May-pole, now rarely seen in our streets, though
Shakespeare tells us that in his time the festival was so eagerly
anticipated that no one could sleep upon its eve.[570] At midnight the
people rose, and, going to the nearest woods, tore down branches of
trees, with which the sun, when he rose, would find doors and windows
decked for him. They spent the day in dancing round the May-pole, with
rude, rustic mirth, man joining with nature to celebrate the coming of
summer. The opposite to it was the day called "Samhain" in Ireland and
Scotland, "Sauin" in Man, and "Nos Galan-gaeof" (the Night of the Winter
Calends) in Wales. This festival was a sad one: summer was over, and
winter, with its short, sunless days and long, dreary nights, was at
hand. It was the beginning, too, of the ancient Celtic year,[571] and
omens for the future might be extorted from dark powers by uncanny
rites. It was the holiday of the dead and of all the more evil
supernatural beings. "On November-eve", says a North Cardiganshire
proverb, "there is a bogy on every stile." The Scotch have even invented
a special bogy-the _Samhanach_ or goblin which comes out at
Samhain.[572]

The sun-god himself is said to have instituted the August festival
called "Lugnassad" (Lugh's commemoration) in Ireland, "Lla Lluanys" in
Man, and "Gwyl Awst" (August Feast) in Wales; and it was once of hardly
less importance than Beltaine or Samhain. It is noteworthy, too, that
the first of August was a great day at Lyons-formerly called Lugudunum,
the _dn_ (town) of Lugus. The midsummer festival, on the other hand,
has largely merged its mythological significance in the Christian Feast
of St. John.

The characteristic features of these festivals give certain proof of
the original nature of the great pagan ceremonials of which they are
the survivals and travesties.[573] In all of them, bonfires are
lighted on the highest hills, and the hearth fires solemnly rekindled.
They form the excuse for much sport and jollity. But there is yet
something sinister in the air; the "fairies" are active and abroad,
and one must be careful to omit no prescribed rite, if one would avoid
kindling their anger or falling into their power. To some of these
still-half-believed-in nature-gods offerings were made down to a
comparatively late period. When Pennant wrote, in the eighteenth
century, it was the custom on Beltaine-day in many Highland villages
to offer libations and cakes not only to the "spirits" who were
believed to be beneficial to the flocks and herds, but also to
creatures like the fox, the eagle, and the hoodie-crow which so often
molested them.[574] At Hallowe'en (the Celtic Samhain) the natives of
the Hebrides used to pour libations of ale to a marine god called
Shony, imploring him to send sea-weed to the shore.[575] In honour,
also, of such beings, curious rites were performed. Maidens washed
their faces in morning dew, with prayers for beauty. They carried
sprigs of the rowan, that mystic tree whose scarlet berries were the
ambrosial food of the Tuatha D Danann.

In their original form, these now harmless rural holidays were
undoubtedly religious festivals of an orgiastic nature-worship such as
became so popular in Greece in connection with the cult of Dionysus. The
great "lords of life" and of the powers of nature that made and ruled
life were propitiated by maddening invocations, by riotous dances, and
by human sacrifice.

The bonfires which fill so large a part in the modern festivals have
been casually mentioned. Originally they were no mere _feux de joie_,
but had a terrible meaning, which the customs connected with them
preserve. At the Highland Beltaine, a cake was divided by lot, and
whoever drew the "burnt piece" was obliged to leap three times over the
flames. At the midsummer bonfires in Ireland all passed through the
fire; the men when the flames were highest, the women when they were
lower, and the cattle when there was nothing left but smoke. In Wales,
upon the last day of October, the old Samhain, there was a slightly
different, and still more suggestive rite. The hill-top bonfires were
watched until they were announced to be extinct. Then all would race
headlong down the hill, shouting a formula to the effect that the devil
would get the hindmost. The devil of a new belief is the god of the one
it has supplanted; in all three instances, the custom was no mere
meaningless horse-play, but a symbolical human sacrifice.

A similar observance, but of a more cruel kind, was kept up in France
upon St. John's Day, until forbidden by law in the reign of Louis the
Fourteenth. Baskets containing living wolves, foxes, and cats were
burned upon the bonfires, under the auspices and in the presence of the
sheriffs or the mayor of the town.[576] Caesar noted the custom among
the druids of constructing huge wicker-work images, which they filled
with living men, and set on fire, and it can hardly be doubted that the
wretched wolves, foxes, and cats were ceremonial substitutes for human
beings.

An ingenious theory was invented, after the introduction of
Christianity, with the purpose of allowing such ancient rites to
continue, with a changed meaning. The passing of persons and cattle
through flame or smoke was explained as a practice which interposed a
magic protection between them and the powers of evil. This homopathic
device of using the evil power's own sacred fire as a means of
protection against himself somewhat suggests that seething of the kid in
its mother's milk which was reprobated by the Levitical law; but, no
doubt, pagan "demons" were considered fair game. The explanation, of
course, is an obviously and clumsily forced one; it was the grim
druidical philosophy that-to quote Caesar-"unless the life of man was
repaid for the life of man, the will of the immortal gods could not be
appeased" that dictated both the national and the private human
sacrifices of the Celts, the shadows of which remain in the leaping
through the bonfires, and in the numerous recorded sacrifices of cattle
within quite recent times.

Mr. Laurence Gomme, in his _Ethnology in Folklore_, has collected many
modern instances of the sacrifices of cattle not only in Ireland and
Scotland, but also in Wales, Yorkshire, Northamptonshire, Cornwall, and
the Isle of Man.[577] "Within twenty miles of the metropolis of Scotland
a relative of Professor Simpson offered up a live cow as a sacrifice to
the spirit of the murrain."[578] In Wales, when cattle-sickness broke
out, a bullock was immolated by being thrown down from the top of a high
rock. Generally, however, the wretched victims were burned alive. In
1859 an Isle of Man farmer offered a heifer as a burnt offering near
Tynwald Hill, to avert the anger of the ghostly occupant of a barrow
which had been desecrated by opening. Sometimes, even, these burnt
oblations were offered to an alleged Christian saint. The registers of
the Presbytery of Dingwall for the years 1656 and 1678 contain records
of the sacrifices of cattle upon the site of an ancient temple in honour
of a being whom some called "St. Mourie", and others, perhaps knowing
his doubtful character, "ane god Mourie".[579] At Kirkcudbright, it was
St. Cuthbert, and at Clynnog, in Wales, it was St. Beuno, who was
thought to delight in the blood of bulls.[580]

Such sacrifices of cattle appear mainly to have been offered to stay
plague among cattle. Man for man and beast for beast, was, perhaps, the
old rule. But among all nations, human sacrifices have been gradually
commuted for those of animals. The family of the O'Herlebys in
Ballyvorney, County Cork, used in olden days to keep an idol, "an image
of wood about two feet high, carved and painted like a woman".[581] She
was the goddess of smallpox, and to her a sheep was immolated on behalf
of anyone seized with that disease.

The third form of Celtic pagan survival is found in numerous instances
of the adoration of water, trees, stones, and animals. Like the other
"Aryan" nations, the Celts worshipped their rivers. The Dee received
divine honours as a war-goddess with the title of Aerfon, while the
Ribble, under its name of Belisama, was identified by the Romans with
Minerva.[582] Myths were told of them, as of the sacred streams of
Greece. The Dee gave oracles as to the results of the perpetual wars
between the Welsh and the English; as its stream encroached either upon
the Welsh or the English side, so one nation or the other would be
victorious.[583] The Tweed, like many of the Greek rivers, was credited
with human descendants.[584] That the rivers of Great Britain received
human sacrifices is clear from the folklore concerning many of them.
Deprived of their expected offerings, they are believed to snatch by
stealth the human lives for which they crave. "River of Dart, River of
Dart, every year thou claimest a heart," runs the Devonshire folk-song.
The Spey, too, requires a life yearly,[585] but the Spirit of the Ribble
is satisfied with one victim at the end of every seven years.[586]

Evidence, however, of the worship of rivers is scanty compared with that
of the adoration of wells. "In the case of well-worship," says Mr.
Gomme, "it may be asserted with some confidence that it prevails in
every county of the three kingdoms."[587] He finds it most vital in the
Gaelic counties, somewhat less so in the British, and almost entirely
wanting in the Teutonic south-east. So numerous, indeed, are "holy
wells" that several monographs have been written solely upon them.[588]
In some cases these wells were resorted to for the cure of diseases; in
others, to obtain change of weather, or "good luck". Offerings were made
to them, to propitiate their guardian gods or nymphs. Pennant tells us
that in olden times the rich would sacrifice one of their horses at a
well near Abergeleu, to secure a blessing upon the rest.[589] Fowls were
offered at St. Tegla's Well, near Wrexham, by epileptic patients.[590]
But of late years the well-spirits have had to be content with much
smaller tributes-such trifles as pins, rags, coloured pebbles, and small
coins.

With sacred wells were often connected sacred trees, to whose branches
rags and small pieces of garments were suspended by their humble
votaries. Sometimes, where the ground near the well was bare of
vegetation, bushes were artificially placed beside the water. The same
people who venerated wells and trees would pay equal adoration to sacred
stones. Lord Roden, describing, in 1851, the Island of Inniskea, off the
coast of Mayo, asserts that a sacred well called "Derrivla" and a sacred
stone called "Neevougi", which was kept carefully wrapped up in flannel
and brought out at certain periods to be publicly adored, seemed to be
the only deities known to that lone Atlantic island's three hundred
inhabitants.[591] It sounds incredible; but there is ample evidence of
the worship of fetish stones by quite modern inhabitants of our islands.
The Clan Chattan kept such a stone in the Isle of Arran; it was
believed, like the stone of Inniskea, to be able to cure diseases, and
was kept carefully "wrapped up in fair linen cloth, and about that there
was a piece of woollen cloth".[592] Similarly, too, the worship of wells
was connected with the worship of animals. At a well in the "Devil's
Causeway", between Ruckley and Acton, in Shropshire, lived, and perhaps
still live, four frogs who were, and perhaps still are, believed to be
"the devil and his imps"-that is to say, gods or demons of a proscribed
idolatry.[593] In Ireland such guardian spirits are usually fish-trout,
eels, or salmon thought to be endowed with eternal life.[594] The genius
of a well in Banffshire took the form of a fly, which was also said to
be undying, but to transmigrate from body to body. Its function was to
deliver oracles; according as it seemed active or lethargic, its
votaries drew their omens.[595] It is needless to multiply instances of
a still surviving cult of water, trees, stones, and animals. Enough to
say that it would be easy. What concerns us is that we are face to face
in Britain with living forms of the oldest, lowest, most primitive
religion in the world-one which would seem to have been once universal,
and which, crouching close to the earth, lets other creeds blow over it
without effacing it, and outlives one and all of them.

It underlies the three great world-religions, and still forms the real
belief of perhaps the majority of their titular adherents. It is
characteristic of the wisdom of the Christian Church that, knowing its
power, she sought rather to sanctify than to extirpate it. What once
were the Celtic equivalents of the Greek "fountains of the nymphs" were
consecrated as "holy wells". The process of so adopting them began
early. St. Columba, when he went in the sixth century to convert the
Picts, found a spring which they worshipped as a god; he blessed it, and
"from that day the demon separated from the water".[596] Indeed, he so
sanctified no less than three hundred such springs.[597] Sacred stones
were equally taken under the gis of Christianity. Some were placed on
the altars of cathedrals, others built into consecrated walls. The
animal gods either found themselves the heroes of Christian legends, or
where, for some reason, such adoption was hopeless, were proclaimed
"witches' animals", and dealt with accordingly. Such happened to the
hare, a creature sacred to the ancient Britons,[598] but now in bad
odour among the superstitious. The wren, too, is hunted to death upon
St. Stephen's Day in Ireland. Its crime is said to be that it has "a
drop of the de'il's blood in it", but the real reason is probably to be
found in the fact that the Irish druids used to draw auguries from its
chirpings.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We have made in this volume some attempt to draw a picture of the
ancient religion of our earliest ancestors, the Gaelic and the British
Celts. We have shown what can be gathered of the broken remnants of a
mythology as splendid in conception and as brilliant in colour as that
of the Greeks. We have tried to paint its divine figures, and to retell
their heroic stories. We have seen them fall from their shrines, and
yet, rising again, take on new lives as kings, or saints, or knights of
romance, and we have caught fading glimpses of them surviving to-day as
the "fairies", their rites still cherished by worshippers who hardly
know who or why they worship. Of necessity this survey has been brief
and incomplete. Whether the great edifice of the Celtic mythology will
ever be wholly restored one can at present only speculate. Its colossal
fragments are perhaps too deeply buried and too widely scattered. But,
even as it stands ruined, it is a mighty quarry from which poets yet
unborn will hew spiritual marble for houses not made with hands.

-----

Footnote 558:

  In the year 55 B.C.

Footnote 559:

  _Strabo_, Book IV, chap. IV.

Footnote 560:

  _Annals_, Book XIV, chap. XXX.

Footnote 561:

  _Natural History_, Book XXX.

Footnote 562:

  Gildas. See _Six Old English Chronicles_-Bohn's Libraries.

Footnote 563:

  Rennell Rodd: _Customs and Lore of Modern Greece_. Stuart Glennie:
  _Greek Folk Songs_.

Footnote 564:

  Charles Godfrey Leland: _Etruscan Roman Remains in Popular Tradition_.

Footnote 565:

  Rhys: _Celtic Folklore_, p. 670; Curtin: _Tales of the Fairies and of
  the Ghost World_; and Mr. Leland Duncan's _Fairy Beliefs from County
  Leitrim_ in _Folklore_, June, 1896.

Footnote 566:

  The Mabinogi of _Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed_.

Footnote 567:

  The story of Lludd and Llevelys.

Footnote 568:

  _Kulhwch and Olwen._

Footnote 569:

  _Morte Darthur_, Book XIX, chaps. I and II.

Footnote 570:

  _Henry VIII_, act V, scene 3.

Footnote 571:

  Rhys: _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 514.

Footnote 572:

  _Ibid._, p. 516.

Footnote 573:

  A good account of the Irish festivals is given by Lady Wilde in her
  _Ancient Legends of Ireland_, pp. 193-221.

Footnote 574:

  Pennant: _A Tour in Scotland and Voyage to the Hebrides_, 1772.

Footnote 575:

  Martin: _Description of the Western Islands of Scotland_, 1695.

Footnote 576:

  Gaidoz: _Esquisse de la Rligion des Gaulois_, p. 21.

Footnote 577:

  Gomme: _Ethnology in Folklore_, pp. 136-139.

Footnote 578:

  _Ibid._, p. 137.

Footnote 579:

  Mitchell: _The Past in the Present_, pp. 271, 275.

Footnote 580:

  Elton: _Origins of English History_, p. 284.

Footnote 581:

  Gomme: _Ethnology in Folklore_, p. 140.

Footnote 582:

  The word Dee probably meant "divinity". The river was also called
  Dyfridwy, _i.e._ "water of the divinity". See Rhys: _Lectures on Welsh
  Philology_, p. 307.

Footnote 583:

  Rhys: _Celtic Britain_, p. 68.

Footnote 584:

  Rogers: _Social Life in Scotland_, chap. III, p. 336.

Footnote 585:

  _Folklore_, chap. III, p. 72.

Footnote 586:

  Henderson: _Folklore of Northern Counties_, p. 265.

Footnote 587:

  Gomme: _Ethnology in Folklore_, p. 78.

Footnote 588:

  Hope: _Holy Wells of England_; Harvey: _Holy Wells of Ireland_.

Footnote 589:

  Sikes: _British Goblins_, p. 351.

Footnote 590:

  _Ibid._, p. 329.

Footnote 591:

  Roden: _Progress of the Reformation in Ireland_, pp. 51-54.

Footnote 592:

  Martin: _Description of the Western Islands_, pp. 166-226.

Footnote 593:

  Burne: _Shropshire Folklore_, p. 416.

Footnote 594:

  Gomme: _Ethnology in Folklore_, pp. 92-93.

Footnote 595:

  _Ibid._, p. 102.

Footnote 596:

  Adamnan's _Vita Columb_.

Footnote 597:

  Dr. Whitley Stokes: _Three Middle Irish Homilies_.

Footnote 598:

  Caesar: _De Bello Gallico_, Book V, chap. XII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                APPENDIX


                   A FEW BOOKS UPON CELTIC MYTHOLOGY
                             AND LITERATURE

The object of this short list is merely to supplement the marginal notes
by pointing out to a reader desirous of going deeper into the subject
the most recent and accessible works upon it. That they should be
accessible is, in its intention, the most important thing; and therefore
only books easily and cheaply obtainable will be mentioned.


                              INTRODUCTORY

Matthew Arnold.-THE STUDY OF CELTIC LITERATURE. Popular Edition.
    London, 1891.

Ernest Renan.-THE POETRY OF THE CELTIC RACES (and other studies).
    Translated by William G. Hutchinson. London, 1896.

    _Two eloquent appreciations of Celtic literature._

Magnus Maclean, M.A., D.C.L.-THE LITERATURE OF THE CELTS. Its
    History and Romance. London, 1902.

    _A handy exposition of all the branches of Celtic literature._

Elizabeth A. Sharp (editor).-LYRA CELTICA. An Anthology of
    Representative Celtic Poetry. Ancient Irish, Alban, Gaelic,
    Breton, Cymric, and Modern Scottish and Irish Celtic Poetry.
    With introduction and notes by William Sharp. Edinburgh, 1896.

Alfred Nutt.-CELTIC AND MEDIVAL ROMANCE. No. 1 of Mr. Nutt's
    "Popular Studies in Mythology, Romance, and Folklore". London,
    1899.

    _A pamphlet briefly tracing the indebtedness of medival
    European literature to pre-medival Celtic sources._


                               HISTORICAL

H. d'Arbois de Jubainville.-LA CIVILISATION DES CELTES ET CELLE DE
    L'POPE HOMRIQUE. Paris, 1899.

    _Vol. VI of the author's monumental "Cours de Littrature
    celtique."_

Patrick Weston Joyce.-A SOCIAL HISTORY OF ANCIENT IRELAND, treating
    of the Government, Military System, and Law; Religion, Learning,
    and Art; Trades, Industries, and Commerce; Manners, Customs, and
    Domestic Life of the Ancient Irish People. 2 vols. London, 1903.

Charles I. Elton, F.S.A.-ORIGINS OF ENGLISH HISTORY. Second edition,
    revised. London, 1890.

John Rhys.-CELTIC BRITAIN. "Early Britain" Series. London, 1882.

H. d'Arbois de Jubainville.-INTRODUCTION  L'TUDE DE LA LITTRATURE
    CELTIQUE. Vol. I of the "Cours de Littrature celtique". Paris,
    1883.

    _Contains, among other information, the fullest and most
    authentic account of the druids and druidism._


                            GAELIC MYTHOLOGY

H. d'Arbois de Jubainville.-LE CYCLE MYTHOLOGIQUE IRLANDAIS ET LA
    MYTHOLOGIE CELTIQUE. Vol. II of the "Cours de Littrature
    celtique". Paris, 1884. Translated into English as

  THE IRISH MYTHOLOGICAL CYCLE AND CELTIC MYTHOLOGY. With notes by
    R. I. Best. Dublin, 1903.

    _An account of Irish mythical history and of some of the greater
    Gaelic gods. With chapters on some of the more striking phases
    of Celtic belief._

Alfred Nutt.-THE VOYAGE OF BRAN, SON OF FEBAL. An Irish Historic
    Legend of the eighth century. Edited by Kuno Meyer. With essays
    upon the Happy Otherworld in Irish Myth and upon the Celtic
    Doctrine of Rebirth. Vol. I-The Happy Otherworld. Vol. II-The
    Celtic Doctrine of Rebirth. Grimm Library, Vols. IV and VI.
    London, 1895-1897.

    _Contains, among other notable contributions to the study of
    Celtic mythology, an enquiry into the nature of the Tuatha D
    Danann, a subject briefly treated in the same author's_

  THE FAIRY MYTHOLOGY OF SHAKESPEARE. No. 6 of "Popular Studies in
    Mythology, Romance, and Folklore". London, 1900.

Patrick Weston Joyce.-OLD CELTIC ROMANCES. Translated from the
    Gaelic. London, 1894.

    _A retelling in popular modern style of some of the more
    important mythological and Fenian stories._

Lady Gregory.-GODS AND FIGHTING MEN. The story of the Tuatha D
    Danann and of the Fianna of Erin. Arranged and put into English
    by Lady Gregory. With a Preface by W. B. Yeats. London, 1904.

    _Covers much the same ground as Mr. Joyce's book, but in more
    literary manner._

Alfred Nutt.-OSSIAN AND THE OSSIANIC LITERATURE. No. 3 of "Popular
    Studies in Mythology, Romance, and Folklore". London, 1899.

    _A short survey of the literature connected with the Fenians._

John Gregorson Campbell, Minister of Tiree.-THE FIANS. Stories,
    poems, and traditions of Fionn and his Warrior Band,
    collected entirely from oral sources. With introduction and
    bibliographical notes by Alfred Nutt. Vol. IV of "Waifs and
    Strays of Celtic Tradition". London, 1891.

    _An account of the Fenians from the Scottish-Gaelic side._

Alfred Nutt.-CUCHULAINN THE IRISH ACHILLES. No. 8 of "Popular
    Studies in Mythology, Romance, and Folklore". London, 1900.

    _A brief but excellent introduction to the Cuchulainn cycle._

Lady Gregory.-CUCHULAIN OF MUIRTHEMNE. The story of the Men of the
    Red Branch of Ulster. Arranged and put into English by Lady
    Gregory. With a Preface by W. B. Yeats. London, 1902.

    _A retelling in poetic prose of the tales connected with
    Cuchulainn._

Eleanor Hull.-THE CUCHULLIN SAGA IN IRISH LITERATURE. Being a
    collection of stories relating to the Hero Cuchullin, translated
    from the Irish by various scholars. Compiled and edited with
    introduction and notes by Eleanor Hull. With Map of Ancient
    Ireland. Grimm Library, Vol. VIII. London, 1898.

    _A series of Cuchulainn stories from the ancient Irish
    manuscripts. More literal than Lady Gregory's adaptation._

H. d'Arbois de Jubainville.-L'POPE CELTIQUE EN IRLANDE. Vol. V of
    the "Cours de Littrature celtique". Paris, 1892.

    _A collection, translated into French, of some of the principal
    stories of the Cuchulainn cycle, with various appendices upon
    Gaelic mythological subjects._

L. Winifred Faraday, M.A.-THE CATTLE RAID OF CUALGNE (Tain Bo
    Cuailgne). An old Irish prose-epic translated for the first time
    from the Leabhar na h-Uidhri and the Yellow Book of Lecan. Grimm
    Library, Vol. XVI. London, 1904.

    _A strictly literal rendering of the central episode of the
    Cuchulainn cycle._


                           BRITISH MYTHOLOGY

Ivor B. John.-THE MABINOGION. No. 11 of "Popular Studies in
    Mythology, Romance, and Folklore". London, 1901.

    _A pamphlet introduction to the Mabinogion literature._

Lady Charlotte Guest.-THE MABINOGION. From the Welsh of the LLYFR
    COCH O HERGEST (the Red Book of Hergest) in the library of Jesus
    College, Oxford. Translated, with notes, by Lady Charlotte
    Guest.

      First edition. Text, translation, and notes, 3 vols., 1849.
                     Translation and notes only, 1 vol., 1877.
                     The Boys' Mabinogion, 1881.

    _Cheap editions of this classic have been lately issued. One may
    obtain it in Mr. Nutt's handsome little volume; as one of Dent's
    "Temple Classics"; or in the "Welsh Library"._

J. Loth.-LES MABINOGION, traduits en entier pour la premire fois en
    franais avec un commentaire explicatif et des notes critiques.
    2 vols. Vols. III and IV of De Jubainville's "Cours de
    Littrature celtique". Paris, 1889.

    _A more exact translation than that of Lady Guest, with notes
    embodying more recent scholarship._

J. A. Giles, D.C.L.-OLD ENGLISH CHRONICLES, including ... Geoffrey
    of Monmouth's British History, Gildas, Nennius ... Edited, with
    illustrative notes, by J. A. Giles, D.C.L. "Bohn's Antiquarian
    Library". London, 1901.

    _The most accessible edition of Geoffrey of Monmouth._

Sir Thomas Malory.-THE MORTE DARTHUR. Edited by Dr. H. Oskar Sommer.
    Vol. I-the Text. Vol. II-Glossary, Index, &c. Vol. III-Study on
    the Sources. London, 1889-1891.

    _Vol. I of this, the best text of the Morte Darthur, can be
    obtained separately._

Jessie L. Weston.-KING ARTHUR AND HIS KNIGHTS. A survey of Arthurian
    romance. No. 4 of "Popular Studies in Mythology, Romance, and
    Folklore". London, 1899.

Alfred Nutt.-THE LEGENDS OF THE HOLY GRAIL. No. 14 of "Popular
    Studies in Mythology, Romance, and Folklore". London, 1902.

    _Useful introductions to a more special study of Arthurian
    literature._


                 COMPARATIVE STUDY OF CELTIC MYTHOLOGY

John Rhys.-LECTURES ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF RELIGION AS
    ILLUSTRATED BY CELTIC HEATHENDOM. "The Hibbert Lectures for
    1886." London, 1898.

John Rhys.-STUDIES IN THE ARTHURIAN LEGEND. Oxford, 1901.

    _These two volumes are the most important attempts yet made
    towards a scientific and comprehensive study of the Celtic
    mythology._


                       CELTIC FAIRY AND FOLK LORE


                                 GAELIC

T. Crofton Croker.-FAIRY LEGENDS AND TRADITIONS OF THE SOUTH OF
    IRELAND.

    _This book is one of the earliest, and, if not the most
    scientific, perhaps the most attractive of the many collections
    of Irish fairy-lore. Later compilations are Mr. William
    Larminie's_

    _"West Irish Folktales and Romances", and Mr. Jeremiah Curtin's
    "Hero Tales of Ireland", "Myths and Folklore of Ireland", and
    "Tales of the Fairies, collected in South Munster". On the
    Scotch side, notice should be particularly taken of Campbell's
    "Popular Tales of the West Highlands" and the volumes entitled
    "Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition". All these books are
    either recent or recently republished, and are merely selected
    out of a large list of works, valuable and otherwise, upon this
    lighter side of Celtic mythology._


                                BRITISH

John Rhys.-CELTIC FOLKLORE, WELSH AND MANX. 2 vols. Oxford, 1901.

Wirt Sikes.-BRITISH GOBLINS: Welsh Folklore, Fairy Mythology,
    Legends, and Traditions. By Wirt Sikes, United States Consul for
    Wales. London, 1880.


                     FOLKLORE COMPARATIVELY TREATED

George Laurence Gomme.-ETHNOLOGY IN FOLKLORE. "Modern Science"
    Series. London, 1892.

    _An attempt to assign apparently non-Aryan beliefs and customs
    in the British islands to pre-Aryan inhabitants._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 INDEX


 Aberffraw, marriage of Branwen at, 289.
 Abergeleu, sacred well at, 415.
 Achill Island, folk-tales preserved at, 233.
 Achilles, the Irish, 158.
 Achren, battle of, 305, 306;
   castle of, 320.
 Acrisius, 236.
 Adamnan's _Life of Saint Columba_, 401, 417.
 Advocates' Library at Edinburgh, 11, 190.
 Aebh, wife of Lr, 142.
 Aed, son of Lr, 143.
 Aedh, son of Miodhchaoin, 105.
 Aeife, wife of Lr, 142, 143, 144.
 Aerfon, a title of the river Dee, 413.
 _s Sdhe_, the "folk of the mounds", the gods or fairies, 137, 168.
 Africa, 19, 120, 274, 324.
 Aganippus, king of the Franks, 382, 383.
 Agriculture god of, British, 261;
   a Gaulish, 274.
 Ailbhe, foster-daughter of Bodb the Red, 142.
 Aileach, grave of Nuada at, 122, 157.
 Ailill, king of Connaught, 147, 154, 164, 165, 175, 179, 200.
 Ailinn, love-story of, 188, 189.
 Ailioll of Arran, 142.
 Ain, queen of the fairies of South Munster, 244-246.
 Ainle, one of the sons of Usnach, 192, 193, 196.
 Airceltrai, the _sdh_ of Ogma, 136, 157.
 Airem, Eochaid, high king of Ireland, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 331,
    332.
 _Airem_, meaning of the word, 149, 333.
 Airmid, daughter of Diancecht, 80, 81, 82, 110.
 Alator, a war-god worshipped in Britain, 275.
 Alaw, river in Anglesey, 294, 295.
 Alba, 97, 104, 163, 178, 192, 193, 196, 382;
   Deirdre's farewell to, 194-195.
 Albania, a name for Alba, 382.
 Ale of Goibniu, 61.
 Allobroges, 384, 385.
 Amaethon, son of Dn, British god of Agriculture, 261, 305, 308, 313,
    316, 345;
   fights against Brn in the battle of Achren, 305-308;
   assists Kulhwch to win Olwen, 345.
 Amergin, druid of the Milesians, 123-130.
 Amesbury, "castle" of, 29.
 Amlwch, stream of, 295.
 Ana, see Anu.
 Ancient Britons, who were the, 18-23.
 Aneurin, a sixth-century British bard, 11, 295, 372.
 Aneurin, the Book of, 11.
 Anglesey, island of, 289, 294, 322, 388, 400.
 Anglo-Saxon, our descent not entirely, 3.
 Anguish, Anguissance, king of Ireland, 357.
 Angus, Gaelic god of love and beauty, 56, 79, 80, 117, 136, 139-142,
    147, 156, 157, 205, 211-214, 217, 218, 221, 240;
   his attributes, 56;
   his wooing of Caer, 140-142;
   cheats his father, the Dagda, 139;
   steals Etain from Mider, 147;
   helps Diarmait and Grainne, 217, 218, 221;
   matches his pigs against the Fenians, 213-214.
 Anicetus, Sol Apollo, a Romano-British god, 275.
 Animals, sacred, 406, 416, 417;
   sacrifices of, 406, 411, 412, 413.
 Anna, sister of Arthur, 323.
 _Annals of the Four Masters_, 204.
 Annwn, the British Otherworld, 254, 273, 278-282, 303, 308, 309, 318,
    319, 321, 390, 391.
 _Annwn, the Spoiling of_, a poem by Taliesin, 305, 306, 317, 366.
 Anu, or Ana, a Gaelic goddess of prosperity and abundance, 50;
   the "Paps of Ana", 50;
   still living in folklore as Aynia and Ain, 245.
 Aoibhinn, queen of the fairies of North Munster, 244.
 Aoife, an Amazon defeated by Cuchulainn, 164, 176, 177.
 Aphrodit, the British, 271, 388.
 Apollo, the Gaelic, 62;
   the British, 262;
   a temple of, in Britain, 42, 325.
 Apples, of the Garden of the Hesperides, 98, 99, 102;
   in the Celtic Elysium, 98, 136.
 Apple-tree of Ailenn, 189.
 Aquitani, 22.
 Aranon, son of Mil, 123.
 Arawn, king of Annwn, 279, 280, 281, 306, 308, 309, 312, 315, 329, 357,
    375.
 Ardan, a son of Usnach, 192, 193, 196.
 Ard Chein, 93.
 Arddu, Black Stone of, 305.
 Ars, 52.
 _Argetlm_, 49, 78.
 Arianrod, a British goddess, 261-265, 313, 317, 322, 364, 371;
   her place in later legend taken by Arthur's sister, 364.
 Armagh, 136, 158.
 Arnold, Matthew, 3, 16, 356.
 Arran, Isle of, 60, 142, 415.
 Art, the "Lonely", king of Tara, 189, 202.
 Artaius, Mercurius, a Gaulish god, 274.
 Arthur, 6, 8, 14, 155, 202, 222, 246, 258, 259, 271, 273, 274, 276, 296,
    304, 306, 311, 312-320, 322, 323, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330-343, 348,
    349, 351-360, 362, 364-366, 368, 371, 374-376, 392, 407;
   the mythical and the historical, 313, 314;
   assumes the attributes of Gwydion, 316;
   the Spoiling of Annwn by, 319-322;
   becomes head of the British Pantheon, 312-313;
   wins Olwen for Kulhwch, 343-353;
   in Geoffrey of Monmouth's _History_, 374, 375;
   leads the Wild Hunt, 392.
 _Arthurian Legend, Studies in the_, Professor Rhys's, 148, 158, 255,
    257, 258, 269, 272, 274, 278, 285, 313, 314, 316, 321, 322, 323, 326,
    327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333, 358, 359, 360, 364, 367, 368, 369,
    370, 383, 387, 389.
 Artur, son of Nemed, 274.
 Aryans, 21, 31, 32, 247;
   common traditions of the, 32, 176, 189;
   Aryan languages, 21.
 Astarte, worshipped at Corbridge, 275.
 Astolat, 362.
 Athens, 153.
 Athlone, 175, 216.
 Augusel, a king of Scotland, 375.
 Aurelius, a British king, 325.
 Avallach, see Avallon.
 Avallon, a British god of the Underworld, 329, 359;
   Isle of, 374, and see Avilion.
 Avebury, the "castle" of, 29.
 Avilion, 133, 315, 329, 332, 334, 335, 390, 394.
 Aynia, a fairy queen of Ulster, 245.

 Babylon, 178.
 Badb, a Gaelic war-goddess, 52, 53, 72, 117, 119, 245;
   the name often used generically, 53;
   description of a, 53.
 "Badger in the bag", the game of, 285, 303.
 Badon, battle of, 338.
 Baile, love-story of, 188-189.
 Baile's Strand, 186, 188.
 Bajocassus, Temple of the sun-god Belinus at, 276.
 Bala lake, 265.
 Balan, 276, 357, 364.
 Balder, 33.
 Balgatan, a mountain near Cong, 73.
 Balin, 276, 357, 358, 364.
 Ballymagauran, village of, 38.
 Ballymote, Book of, 10, 38, 123, 138, 229, 231.
 Ballysadare, 75.
 Balor, a king of the Fomors, 48-49, 50, 79, 83, 84, 90, 112, 113, 120,
    233-239, 269, 324, 341, 345, 371;
   his evil eye, 49;
   kills Nuada and Macha, 112;
   is blinded by Lugh, 112;
   tales of, in modern folklore, 233-239.
 "Balor's Hill", 69, 90.
 Ban, king of Benwyk, 356, 360, 362.
 Banba, a goddess representing Ireland, 125;
   an ancient name of Ireland, 126, 153.
 _Banshee_, meaning of the word, 137.
 Baoisgne, Clann, 209, 217.
 Bards, 32, 42.
 Bardsey Island, 326.
 Barrow, river, how it got its name, 62.
 Barrule, South, 242.
 Barry, the, 246.
 Basque race, 19.
 Bath, 228, 275, 276, 338, 381.
 Bathurst's _Roman Antiquities in Lydney Park_, 254.
 Battle of Achren, 305;
   of Badon, 338;
   of Camlan, 222, 315, 334, 337, 375, 376;
   of Clontarf, 53;
   of Gabhra, 222, 223, 225, 315;
   of Mag Rath, 52;
   of Moytura Northern, 107-117, 407;
   of Moytura Southern, 72-75;
   of the Trees, 123, 305-308.
 Bayeux, temple of Belinus at, 276.
 Bean, curious passage relating to the, 306, 307.
 Becuma of the Fair Skin, 202.
 Bedivere, Sir, 6.
 Bedwini, Arthur's bishop, 337.
 Bedwyr, a follower of Arthur, 343, 344, 349.
 Belacatudor, a war-god worshipped in Britain, 275.
 Belg, 23, 76.
 Beli, a British god, 120, 252, 260, 268, 295, 313, 335-376.
 Belinus, a Celtic sun-god, 276, 358, 364;
   as a king of Britain, 276, 384, 385.
 Belisama, the Latin name of the Ribble, 413.
 Beltaine, the Gaelic May-day, 41, 65, 287, 406, 408, 409, 410.
 Berber race, 19.
 Beth, an Iberian god, 64.
 Bettws-y-coed, 7.
 Beuno, Saint, sacrifices of cattle to, 413.
 Big-Knife, Osla, 352, 353.
 Bil, father of the Gaelic gods and men, 51, 65, 120, 121, 122, 252.
 Billingsgate, origin of name, 385.
 Birds, of Rhiannon, the, 273, 294, 296;
   Dechtir and her maidens changed into, 160.
 Black Book of Caermarthen, the, 11, 255, 311, 312, 335.
 Bladud, mythical founder of Bath, 381.
 Blathnat, daughter of Mider, 55, 179.
 Bliant, Castle, 358.
 Blodeuwedd, wife of Lleu Llaw Gyffes, 265, 266, 268.
 Blood-fines among the Celts, 30;
   blood-fine paid for Cian, 94-97.
 Boann, wife of the Dagda, 55, 139, 141.
 Boar, wild, of Bengulben, 221;
   the Boar Trwyth, 347-353.
 Bodb the Red, son of the Dagda, 60, 133, 140, 141-145, 157, 205, 208;
   is made king of the Tuatha D Danann, 140;
   his swineherd, 164;
   marries his daughter Sadb to Finn, 208.
 Bogles, 393, 403, 405.
 Bonfires in Celtic ritual, 409-412.
 Bordeaux, Sir Huon of, 7.
 _Boread_, 42.
 Borrach, 193, 195, 200.
 Bors, king of Gaul, 360.
 Bors, Sir, 368, 369.
 Boyne, river, 55, 56, 129, 136, 137, 158, 210, 213, 230.
 Brahmans, 32.
 Bran, son of Febal, an Irish king, 134, 135, 224.
 Bran, Finn's favourite hound, 213.
 Brn, British god of the Underworld, 258, 271-272, 276, 289-294, 296,
    306, 308, 313, 328, 329, 331, 338, 356, 357, 360, 364, 366, 384, 386,
    387, 389, 394;
   fights the battle of Achren, 306;
   becomes the "Wonderful Head", 296;
   in Geoffrey of Monmouth's _History_, 384, 385;
   in the Morte Darthur, 356, 357;
   introduces Christianity into Britain, 386.
 Brandegore, King, 272, 356.
 Brandegoris, King, 356.
 Brandel, Brandiles, Sir, 356.
 Branwen, British goddess of love, 271, 289-294, 387.
 Brazil, 133.
 Brea, ford of, Finn killed at the, 222.
 Breasal's Island, 133.
 Brcilien, Forest of, 361.
 Bregon, 121.
 Brennius, a mythical British king, 5, 276, 384, 385.
 Brennus, 385.
 Bress, son of Elathan, a Fomor, 50, 78-80, 82, 83, 90, 108-111, 115-116,
    269;
   his beauty, 50;
   marries Brigit, and is made king over the Tuatha D Danann, 78;
   is forced to abdicate, 83;
   makes war on the Tuatha D Danann, 83;
   is defeated and captured, 115-116.
 Brian, son of Tuirenn, 90, 91, 92, 94, 99-102, 103, 105, 106.
 Briareus, 326.
 "Bridge of the Cliff", the, 163.
 Bridget, Saint, 7, 56, 228.
 Brigantes, a North British tribe, 277.
 Brigantia, a British Minerva, 277.
 Brigindo, a Gaulish goddess, 277.
 Brigit, Gaelic goddess of fire, poetry, and the hearth, 56, 78, 109,
    110, 228, 269, 277, 387;
   is married to Bress, 78;
   is canonized as Saint Bridget, 228, 387.
 Bri Leith, the _sdh_ of Mider, 136, 148, 152, 332.
 Brindled ox, the, 320.
 Britain, ancient names of, 292, 323.
 _British Goblins_, Mr. Wirt Sikes', 389, 393, 415.
 Britons, ancient, who were the, 18-23.
 BRITONUM, HISTORIA. See Historia, Geoffrey, Nennius.
 Brittany, 24.
 Briun, son of Bethar, 113.
 Brownies, 248, 393, 403.
 Brude, king of the Picts, 401.
 Brugh-na-boyne, 136, 139, 160, 213, 214.
 Brutus, 121, 374.
 Brythons, 21, 22, 23, 24, 35.
 Buarainech, father of Balor, 48.
 Buinne, the Ruthless Red, son of Fergus, 193, 196, 197.
 Bull, the Brown, of Cualgne, 164, 165, 168, 175;
   the White-horned, of Connaught, 165, 175.
 Bwbachod, 393.

 Cadbury, the supposed site of Camelot, 335.
 Cader Idris, 305.
 Caemhoc, Saint, 146.
 Caer, daughter of Etal Ambuel, 141.
 Caer Arianrod, 252, 264.
 Caer Badus, 381.
 Caer Bannawg, 367.
 Caer Colvin, 275.
 Caer Dathyl, 308, 310.
 Caer Golud, 320.
 Caer Llyr, 270.
 Caer London, 376.
 Caer Myrddin, 324.
 Caer Ochren, 320.
 Caer Pedryvan, 319, 356, 367.
 Caer Rigor, 319.
 Caer Sarrlog, 386.
 Caer Sidi, 319, 321, 322, 368.
 Caer Vandwy, 257, 320.
 Caer Vedwyd, 319.
 Caer Wydyr, 320.
 Caesar, Julius, 5, 8, 18, 22, 23, 25, 27, 30, 35, 38, 119, 204, 376,
    399, 412, 417.
 Cairbr, son of Cormac, 206, 222, 315.
 Cairn of Octriallach, 110.
 Cairpr, son of Ogma, bard of the Tuatha D Danann, 58, 82, 83, 87, 139.
 Calais, 383.
 Calatin the wizard, 171, 172;
   daughters of Calatin, 178-181.
 Caledonians, 22.
 Camelot, 314, 335.
 Camlan, battle of, 222, 315, 334, 337, 375, 376.
 Camulodunum, the Roman name of Colchester, 276.
 Camulus, a Gaulish god of war and the sky, 51, 204, 275, 323.
 Caoilte, a Fenian hero, 63, 146, 208, 212, 217, 222, 227, 246.
 Caractacus, Caratacus, 271, 386, 387.
 Caradawc of the Strong Arms, son of Brn, 271, 291, 295, 338, 386, 389.
 Carbonek, 357, 367.
 Carmarthen, 324.
 Carnac, 114.
 Carnarvon, 310.
 Carrowmore, 114.
 Cassibellawn, Cassivelaunus, 376.
 "Cassiopeia's Chair", 252.
 Castell y Moch, 310.
 Castle of Arianrod, 252, 264.
 Castle Bliant, 358.
 Castle of Gwydion, 253.
 Castle Hacket, 244.
 Castle of Revelry, 366, 367.
 Castle of Riches, 367.
 "Castles", Celtic, 29.
 Caswallawn, son of Beli, 295.
 _Cath Godeu._ See the "Battle of the Trees".
 Cathbad, druid of Emain Macha, 161, 162, 174, 178, 181, 190, 198, 200.
 Cathubodva, a Gaulish war-goddess, 276.
 Cauldrons in Celtic mythology; the Dagda's, 54, 71, 366;
   of Ogyrvran the Giant, 366;
   of Diwrnach the Gael, 346, 349;
   cauldron given by Brn to Matholwch, 290, 293, 366;
   cauldron stolen from Mider by Cuchulainn, 176, 366;
   cauldron kept in Annwn by the chief of Hades, 273, 319, 366;
   the legend of the Holy Grail founded upon Celtic myths of a cauldron
      of fertility and inspiration, 365-370.
 Celt, 22.
 Celtic mythical literature the forerunner of medival romance, 184.
 Celtic strain in modern Englishmen, 3.
 Celts, the, 19, 20, 21, 25-44, 70, 119, 121, 124, 136, 138, 261, 262,
    278, 283, 329, 404, 407, 412.
 Cemmes, a parish in Pembrokeshire, 394.
 _Cenn Cruaich_, 41.
 _Cermait_, _i.e._ "Honey-mouth", a title of Ogma, 57.
 Ceth, son of Diancecht, 62, 90.
 Cethlenn, wife of Balor, 90.
 "Chain, Lugh's", 62;
   "chief's", 93.
 Champion of the Tuatha D Danann, 59, 276;
   Champions of the Red Branch, see Red Branch;
   "The Champion's Prophecy", 201.
 Chariots, war, of the Celts, 25, 27, 28.
 Charon, 403.
 Chaucer, 2, 12.
 Chess, Mider's game with Eochaid Airem, 149;
   Ossian's game with Finn, 220.
 Children of Dn, Nudd, and Llyr, 252.
 Christianity, introduced into Britain by Brn, 386, 387;
   conquers Druidism, 400, 401;
   adopts harmless heathen cults, 416, 417.
 Cian, son of Diancecht, 62, 63, 78, 84, 90-94, 106, 235-237, 239, 269,
    345, 371.
 Ciaran, Saint, 10.
 Cichol the Footless, a Fomor, 66.
 Cilgwri, the Ousel of, 349.
 Clann Baoisgne, 209, 217, 222:
 Clan Chattan, 415.
 Clann Morna, 209, 211, 218, 232.
 Clann Neamhuinn, 216, 218.
 Clann Ronan, 218.
 _Clas Myrddin_, an old name for Britain, 323.
 Claudius, Roman emperor, 387.
 Cliodna, fairy queen of Munster, 244.
 Clontarf, battle of, 53.
 Cld, goddess of the river Clyde, 284, 285.
 Cluricanes, 248.
 _Cnoc Miodhchaoin_, 97.
 Cnucha, battle of, 209.
 Coblynau, 393.
 Cocidius, a war-god worshipped by a Dacian colony in Cumberland, 275.
 Coed Helen, 310.
 Coel, a mythical king of Britain, 275, 323.
 _Coir Anmann_, the "Choice of Names", an old Irish tract, 50, 54, 61,
    245, 270.
 Colchester, 276.
 "Cole, Old King", 276.
 Collen, Saint, 389, 390, 391.
 Columba, Saint, 12, 240, 401, 417.
 _Comes Britanni_, 313.
 _Comes Littoris Saxonici_, 314.
 Comyn, Michael, a Gaelic poet, 223.
 Conair the Great, high king of Ireland, 152, 157.
 Conall the Victorious, 163, 177, 183, 192, 193, 197, 198.
 Conan, a Fenian hero, 209, 218.
 Conann, son of Febar, a king of the Fomors, 67.
 Conchobar, king of Ulster, 29, 147, 154-156, 158, 160-162, 166-168, 173,
    174, 179, 185, 190-192, 193, 195-198, 200, 201, 204, 227;
   his treachery towards the sons of Usnach, 192-200;
   his tragical death, 155.
 Condates, a war-god worshipped in Britain, 275.
 Cong, village of, 73, 76.
 Conlaoch, son of Cuchulainn, 177, 178.
 Conn the Hundred Fighter, 201, 202.
 Conn, son of Lr, 143.
 Conn, son of Miodhchaoin, 105.
 Connaught, 73, 75, 76, 165, 168.
 Connla, son of Conn the Hundred Fighter, 202.
 _Contemporary Review_, the, 241.
 Contrary Head, 242.
 Conway, river, 262.
 Cooking-places of the Fenians, 206.
 Cooking-spits of the women of Fianchuiv, 96;
   at Tara, 98.
 Cooley, see Cualgne.
 Coranians, a mythical tribe of dwarfs, 377-379.
 Corb, an Iberian god, 64.
 Corbridge, 275.
 Corc, son of Miodhchaoin, 105.
 Corca-Duibhne, 70.
 Corca-Oidce, 70.
 Cordeilla, daughter of Leir, in Geoffrey of Monmouth's _History_,
    381-383.
 Cordelia, daughter of Shakespeare's _King Lear_, 259, 381.
 Coritiacus, a war-god worshipped in Britain, 275.
 Cormac, "the Magnificent", 201, 202, 203, 206, 215, 222, 315.
 Cornwall, 3, 23, 294, 296, 327, 334, 353, 382, 384.
 Coronation Stone, the, 71.
 Corrib, see Lough Corrib.
 Corspitium, see Corbridge.
 Corwenna, mother of Brennius and Belinus, 385.
 Count of Britain, 313;
   of the Saxon Shore, 314.
 Court of Dn, the, 252, 317.
 Cow, Balor's Gray, 235, 236, 237, 240;
   Mider's three cows, 57, 176.
 Cow, Book of the Dun, 10, 12, 14, 37, 156, 164, 175, 184, 202, 227.
 Credn, the bronze-worker of the Tuatha D Danann, 85, 86, 109.
 Crete, 153.
 Creudylad, daughter of the British sky-god Lludd, 256, 258, 259, 332,
    348, 381, 407.
 Criminal Resolutions of Britain, the Three, 334.
 _Crom Croich_, 40.
 _Cromm Cruaich_, 38, 39, 41, 154, 402.
 Cronos, 63, 65, 326.
 "Croppies' Grave", the, at Tara, 72.
 Cruind, the river, 165.
 Cu, son of Diancecht, 62, 90.
 Cualgne, a province of Ulster, 164, 165, 175.
 Cuan, head of the Munster Fenians, 218.
 Cuchulainn, chief hero of the Ultonians, 10, 11, 14, 27, 154, 155, 156,
    158-188, 192, 193, 202, 204, 210, 217, 223, 227, 274, 366;
   is the son of Lugh, 159-160;
   obvious solar character of, 158-159;
   how he obtained his name, 160-161;
   fights in the Tin B Chuailgne, 164-175;
   his wooing of Emer, 184-186;
   his raid upon the Other World, 175-176;
   his death, 183;
   is raised from the dead by Saint Patrick, 227.
 Culann, chief smith of the Ultonians, 161;
   "Culann's Hound", 161, 166.
 "Culture-King", 153.
 Cumhal, father of Finn, 204, 209, 210, 275.
 Cunedda, a North British king, 373.
 Cunobelinus, king of Britain, 387.
 Curoi, king of Munster, 147, 154, 179.
 Custennin, 343, 344.
 Cuthbert, Saint, bulls sacrificed to, 413.
 Cwm Cawlwyd, the Owl of, 349.
 _Cwm Annwn_, the "Hounds of Hell", 391, 392.
 Cwy, 320.
 Cymbeline, Shakespeare's, 387.
 Cymri, 255, 373.

 Dagda, the, Gaelic god of the Earth, 54, 78, 79, 87, 98, 107-109, 116,
    117, 122, 132, 135, 136, 138-141, 156, 157, 211, 213, 228, 230, 240,
    243, 269, 346, 366;
   his dress, arms, and harp, 54;
   his porridge-feast, 108;
   is cheated by his son Angus, 139;
   resigns the kingship of the Tuatha D Danann, 140;
   his last appearance, 157.
 Daire of Cualgne, owner of the Brown Bull, 165.
 Daln, druid of Eochaid Airem, 392.
 Danes, the, 230.
 Danu, the mother of the Gaelic gods, the same as Anu, _q.v._, 44, 50,
    51, 70, 245, 252, 407.
 Dart, river, 414.
 Dartmoor, 392.
 Darvha, Lake, 143-145.
 Deaf Valley, the, 180.
 Dechtir, mother of Cuchulainn, 156, 159, 160, 181.
 D Danann, see Tuatha D Danann.
 Dee, river, 413.
 Deimne, the first name of Finn, 210.
 Deirdre, 190-200;
   Deirdre's Farewell to Alba, 194-195;
   Deirdre's Lament over the Sons of Usnach, 199-200.
 Demetia, Roman province of, 273, 278.
 Demetrius, an early traveller in Britain, 326.
 "Demon of the air", Aeife changed into a, 145.
 Derivla, a sacred well in the island of Inniskea, 415.
 Desmond, fourth Earl of, nicknamed "the Magician", 245.
 "Destiny, laying a", a Celtic custom, 262-265, 340.
 Devon, 312, 392.
 Devwy, the dales of, 320.
 _Dialogue of the Elders_, the, 205, 222, 404;
   Dialogues of Patrick and Ossian, 226-227.
 Diancecht, the Gaelic god of medicine, 61, 62, 78, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85,
    86, 90, 110, 141, 232, 269;
   makes a silver hand for Nuada, 78;
   kills his son Miach, 81-82;
   presides over the "Spring of Health", 110;
   prescriptions of Diancecht, 232.
 Diarmait O'Duibhne, the Fenian Adonis, 209, 212, 215-221, 315.
 Dinadan, Sir, 328.
 Dinas Dinllev, 264.
 Dinas Emrys, 324, 381.
 Dingwall, Registers of the Presbytery of, 412.
 _Dinnsenchus_, 38, 40, 132, 154.
 Dio Cassius, 387.
 Diodorus Siculus, 41, 42, 325.
 Dionysus, rites of, 410.
 Dis Pater, 51, 120, 252, 383.
 Dissull the Giant, 348-349.
 Diwrnach the Gael, the cauldron of, 346, 349.
 Dobhar, king of Sicily, 96, 98, 102, 103.
 Doctrine of the transmigration of souls, 36, 37.
 Domnann, Fir, _i.e._ men of Domnu. See Fir Domnann.
 Domnu, a goddess, mother of the Fomors, 48, 70, 112;
   meaning of the name, 48;
   gods of Domnu, 48, 70;
   men of Domnu, 70.
 Dn, the British equivalent of the Gaelic Danu, 44, 252, 260, 268, 269,
    273, 295, 308, 310, 316;
   euhemerized into a king of Dublin, 372-373.
 Donn, son of Mil, 126-131, 246.
 "Donn's House", 246.
 Dormarth, the hound of Gwyn son of Nudd, 257.
 Dowth, 137-138.
 Dragon, Red, of Britain, 378;
   White, of the Saxons, 378.
 "Dragon-mouth", a lake called, 141.
 _Dream of Rhonabwy_, the, 260, 312, 337, 338.
 Drogheda, 137.
 Drowes, river, 110.
 Drudwyn, the whelp of Greid the son of Eri, 347.
 Druidism, the religion of the Celts, 35, 43;
   possibly non-Aryan in origin, 36;
   in Gaul, 34;
   derived from Britain, 35;
   suppressed by the Romans, 399, 400.
 Druids, 18, 33-37, 84, 111, 115, 151, 179, 180, 182, 188, 202, 399-401,
    411, 412, 417;
   origin of the name, 33;
   in Gaul, 34;
   in Britain, 35;
   human sacrifices of the druids, 37, 412;
   the druids of Brude, king of the Picts, 401.
 Drumcain, an old name for Tara, 126.
 Dublin, 66, 372.
 Duke of the Britains, the, 313.
 Dulachan, 247, 248.
 _Dul-dauna_, the, 237.
 Dun Cow, Book of the. See Cow.
 Dundalk, 177.
 Dundealgan, 177, 181, 188, 189.
 Dn Scaith, 175-176.
 _Dux Britanniarum._ See Duke of the Britains.
 Dwynwen, Saint, 388.
 Dyfan, Saint, 386.
 Dyfed, or Demetia, a province of South Wales, 273, 278, 279, 281, 282,
    286, 298-301, 303, 304, 309, 310, 394.
 Dylan, a British god, 261, 262, 322, 335, 360, 364, 371.

 Eagle, of Gwern Abwy, 350;
   Lleu changed into an, 266-268.
 Earl Gerald, 245.
 Easal, king of the Golden Pillars, 96, 103.
 Eber, son of Mil, 129-131, 146, 153.
 Eber Scot, 120.
 Eboracum, Roman name of York, 275.
 Edeyrn, son of Nudd, 260.
 Edinburgh, the Advocates' Library at, 11.
 Eel, the Morrg takes the shape of an, 169;
   transformation of the rival swineherds into eels, 165.
 Egypt, 120.
 Eigen, the first female saint in Britain, 386.
 Eildon Hills, Arthur living beneath the, 335.
 Elaine, 362.
 Elathan, a king of the Fomors, 49, 50, 78, 83, 90, 116, 269.
 Elayne, 358.
 Elberich, 392.
 _Elders, Dialogue of the._ See _Dialogue_.
 Elen Lwyddawg, wife of Myrddin, 323, 362.
 Eleutherius, Pope, 386.
 Ellylion, the Welsh elves, 393.
 Elton's _Origins of English History_, 6, 8, 25, 26, 70, 228, 327, 413.
 Elves, 393.
 Elysium, Celtic. See Other World, Celtic.
 Emain Macha, the capital of ancient Ulster, 28, 29, 158, 160, 161, 162,
    164, 173, 174, 179, 180, 183, 188, 192, 194, 196, 200, 201, 204.
 Emer, wife of Cuchulainn, 162, 164, 177, 184-188.
 _Emer, the Wooing of_, an old Irish saga, 28, 29, 37, 184.
 Emperor, a title given in Welsh legend to Arthur, 314, 338.
 Emrys, a title of Myrddin, 324, 329, 360, 369.
 Englishmen, Celtic strain in, 3.
 "Entertaining of the Noble Head", the, 296.
 Eochaid, son of Erc, king of the Fir Bolgs, 69, 73, 74, 75.
 Eochaid Airem, see Airem.
 Eochaid O'Flynn, an Irish poet, 231.
 Erc, king of Tara, 179, 182, 183.
 Eremon, son of Mil, and first king of Ireland, 40, 129, 130, 131, 132,
    146, 153, 154.
 Erin, 97, 98, 99, 102, 104, 126, 193, 225, 231;
   meaning of the word, 126.
 Eriu, a goddess representing Ireland, 125, 126, 128, 129.
 Eros, the Gaelic, 56, 140.
   See Angus.
 Essyllt, wife of March, or Mark. See Iseult.
 Etain, wife of Mider, 57, 139, 147-152, 154, 224, 331-333.
 Etair, a vassal of King Conchobar, 147.
 Etal Ambuel, father of Caer, 141.
 Etan, wife of Ogma, 62, 87, 239.
 Ethnea, a name of Ethniu in modern folklore, 238.
 Ethniu, daughter of Balor, 62, 79, 84, 90, 269, 371.
 _Ethnology in Folklore_, Mr. G. L. Gomme's, 35, 69, 412, 413, 414, 416.
 Etirun, "an idol of the Britons", 294.
 Etive, Loch, 193.
 Etruscans, the, 20; Etruscan mythology in modern Italian folklore, 403.
 Ettard, 358.
 _Ettarre, Pelleas and_, Tennyson's idyll of, 358.
 Euhemerism of Gaelic gods, 227-230;
   of British gods, 372-389.
 Euskarian race, 19.
 Evelake, King, 359.
 Evnissyen, son of Penardun, 290, 292, 293.

 Failinis, the hound of the king of Ioruaidh, 96, 97, 104.
 _Fairie Queene_, Spenser's, 7, 389.
 Fairies, the, 4, 137, 242-248, 389-393, 403, 404, 409, 418;
   the old gods are remembered as "fairies", 243-248, 389-393;
   two varieties of fairy in folklore, 403;
   Irish and Welsh fairies identical in nature, 404;
   king of the Irish fairies, 136;
   king of the Welsh fairies, 392;
   size of the fairies, 404;
   fairy money, 377;
   fairy food, 391;
   the "fairy hills", 135-139, 394.
 Fal, the stone of. See Stone of Destiny.
 "Falcon of May", 369;
   "Falcon of Summer", 369.
 Falga, Isle of, 57, 175.
 Falias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, 71, 72.
 Fand, wife of Manannn son of Lr, 186-188, 202.
 Faraday, Miss, her translation of the _Tin B Chuailgn_, 164.
 Fata Morgana, 395.
 Fate of the Children of Lr, 142-146;
   of the Sons of Tuirenn, 90-105;
   of the Sons of Usnach, 190-200.
 Fea, a war-goddess, wife of Nuada, 52.
 "Feast of Age", Manannn's, 61, 98, 143.
 Feast of Lugh, see Lugnassad.
 Feast of St. John, 409.
 Fec's Pool, on the Boyne, 210.
 Fedlimid, vassal to King Conchobar, 190.
 Fenians, the, 11, 17, 155, 201, 203-209, 211-215, 217-219, 220-223, 225,
    226, 314, 315;
   real or mythical, 203-205;
   origin of, 206;
   duties of, 206;
   accomplishments of, 207;
   chief heroes of, 207-209;
   destruction of, at the battle of Gabhra, 222;
   stories of, 209-226;
   the Fenian sagas possibly non-Aryan, 70.
 Fenius Farsa, 120.
 Ferdiad, a warrior slain by Cuchulainn, 172, 173, 184.
 Fergus, son of Finn, 208.
 Fergus, son of Roy, an Ulster hero, 14, 166, 167, 170, 171, 175,
    192-196, 198, 200.
 Fergusson, Dr. James, 76, 114, 137, 138.
 Festivals, Celtic solar or agricultural, 405-412.
 Ffordd Elen, 324.
 Fiacha, son of Conchobar, 197, 198.
 Fiachadh, king of Ireland, 206.
 Fiachra, son of Lr, 143.
 Fianchuiv, submarine island of, 97, 104.
 _Fianna Eirinn_, see Fenians.
 Figol, son of Mamos, druid of the Tuatha D Danann, 90.
 Findabair, daughter of Medb, 168.
 Findias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, 71, 72.
 Finn mac Coul (Cumhail), 4, 11, 16, 37, 146, 155, 201, 203, 204, 206,
    207, 208, 209, 210-218, 220-222, 224, 226, 246, 254, 274, 314, 315;
   his upbringing and boy-feats, 209-210;
   reorganizes the Fenians, 211;
   is killed at the Ford of Brea, 222;
   is reborn as Mongan, an Ulster chief, 37;
   is he historical or mythical, 204;
   parallels between Finn and Arthur, 314-315.
 Finn mac Gorman, compiler of the Book of Leinster, 10.
 Finn the Seer, 210.
 Finola, daughter of Lr, 143.
 Finvarra, king of the Irish fairies, 243, 244, 405.
 Fiona Macleod, Miss, 241.
 Fionn, see Finn.
 Fionnbharr, the _sdh_ of Meadha assigned to, 136;
   his appearance in the Fenian sagas, 212;
   becomes fairy king of Ireland, 243.
 Fir Bolgs, an Iberian tribe, 68-70, 72-78, 114, 125, 229, 230, 407.
 Fir Domnann, an Iberian tribe, 68-70, 76, 172.
 Fir Gaillion, an Iberian tribe, 68-70, 76.
 Fish, sacred, 416.
 Fly, Etain changed into a, 147;
   Lugh takes the form of a, 159;
   a sacred, 416.
 _Folklore, Ethnology in._ See _Ethnology_.
 Folk-tales, Irish, 233-240; Welsh, 371.
 Fomors, Gaelic deities of Death, Darkness, and the Sea, 11, 48-50, 67,
    70, 76, 83, 86, 88, 89, 90, 98, 107-117, 120, 122, 157, 205, 225,
    229, 230, 252, 269, 274, 327, 406;
   meaning of the name, 48;
   their war with the Tuatha D Danann, 107-117;
   are the Lochlannach in the Fenian sagas, 205.
 Forgall the Wily, father of Emer, 162, 163, 164, 184.
 Fotla, a goddess representing Ireland, 125;
   an ancient name of Ireland, 126.
 "Four Ancient Books of Wales", the, 11, 15.
   See also Skene.
 "Four Branches of the Mabinogi", the, 14, 15, 251, 278, 289, 312, 355.
 "Four-cornered castle", the, 366.
 Frazer's _Golden Bough_, 33.
 "Frivolous Battles of Britain, The Three", 334.
 Frogs, sacred, 416.
 Fury, Great, and Little Fury, two swords of Manannn, 60, 217.

 Gabhra, battle of, 222, 223, 225, 315.
 Gabius, a Roman consul, 385.
 Gabriel Hounds, the, 392.
 _Gae bolg_, Cuchulainn's spear, 170, 173, 178.
 Gaels, 68, 69, 70, 71, 76, 93, 108, 119, 124, 149, 183, 203, 204, 230,
    357.
 Gaiar, son of Manannn, 202.
 Gaillion, Fir. See Fir Gaillion.
 Galahad, Sir, 362, 368, 369.
 _Galan-mai_, Welsh spring festival, 408.
 _Gan Ceanach_, 247.
 Garden of the Hesperides, the, 95, 98, 99.
 Gargantua, Rabelais', 386.
 Gast Rhymri's cubs, 347, 349.
 Gaul, 22, 274, 276, 383, 384, 385.
 Gauls, the, 22, 23, 119, 230.
 Gavida, 238, 239.
 Gavidjeen Go, 235.
 Gawain, Sir, 360, 363, 364, 369, 375.
 _Geasa_, taboos among the Irish Celts, 177, 195, 216.
 _Genii locorum_, 43.
 Geoffrey of Monmouth, 9, 121, 251, 254, 259, 276, 323, 324, 330, 336,
    372, 373-376, 381, 384.
 George's Hill, Saint, 29.
 Geraint, 312, 387.
 Gildas, a British writer, 400.
 "Glamour, the Realm of", an old name for Dyfed, 279.
 Glamour put on Cuchulainn by Cathbad, 178;
   by the daughters of Calatin, 179, 180;
   put on the sons of Usnach, 198;
   on Arianrod, 264, 265;
   on Dyfed, 298.
 Glass Castle, of the Fomors, 67;
   a synonym for the other world, 320, 367.
 Glastonbury, 260, 329.
 Glastonbury Tor, 272, 390.
 Glenn Faisi, 130.
 Glora, Isle of, 144, 145, 146.
 Glyn Cch, 279, 281.
 Gobhan Saer, the, 232, 235, 240.
 Goibniu, Gaelic god of smithcraft, 61, 84, 86, 98, 109, 110, 141, 231,
    232, 238, 239, 261, 371;
   forges the weapons of the Tuatha D Danann, 61, 109;
   kills Ruadan, 110;
   his ale, 61;
   survives in tradition as the Gobhan Saer, _q.v._;
   as a character in folk-tale, 232-240.
   See Gavida and Gavidjeen Go.
 Goidel, a mythical ancestor of the Irish, 120.
 Goidels, the, 21, 22, 23, 24, 35.
 Golden bough, the mistletoe the, 33.
 Golden Pillars, king of the. See Easal.
 Goll, 209, 211, 222.
 Gomme, Mr. G. L., 20, 35, 69, 412, 413, 414, 416.
 Gonorilla, daughter of Leir, 381, 382.
 Gore, 357. See Gower.
 Goreu, Arthur's cousin, 317, 338.
 Gorias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, 71, 72, 97.
 Govannan son of Dn, British god of Smithcraft, 261, 313, 316, 345;
   kills his nephew Dylan, 261;
   assists Kulhwch, 345.
 Gower regarded as part of the other world, 272, 356, 357, 373.
 Grail, the Holy, 2, 7, 273, 357-359, 365-370.
 Grainne, 209, 215-221, 315.
 _Graves of the Warriors, the Verses of the_, 272, 311, 334.
 Gray of Macha, Cuchulainn's horse, 174, 181, 182, 183.
 Greece, 1, 20, 68, 99, 100, 101, 155.
 Greek mythology, ancient, 1, 2, 4;
   modern, 403.
 "Green Meadows of Enchantment", the, 394.
 Gregory, Lady, 159, 201.
 Greid, the son of Eri, 347, 350.
 Gresholm Island, 294, 356, 394.
 _Grianainech_, the "sunny-faced", an epithet of Ogma, 59.
 Grianan Aileach, grave of Nuada at. See Aileach.
 Gronw Pebyr, 265, 266, 268.
 Guanius, Gwyn as a mythical king of the Huns, 375.
 Guest, Lady Charlotte, 253, 255, 268, 278, 289, 295, 298, 308, 317, 337,
    339, 340, 348, 350, 369, 377.
 Guinevere, Arthur's queen, 315, 334, 357, 359, 365, 375, 407.
 Gunvasius, king of the Orkneys, 376.
 Gurgiunt Brabtruc, king of Britain, 385.
 Guyon, Sir, in Spenser's _Fairie Queene_, 7, 389.
 Gwalchaved, 369.
 Gwalchmei, 323, 330, 334, 335, 338, 343, 360, 364, 368, 369, 375.
 Gwales, island of, 294, 296, 356.
 Gwarthegyd, son of Kaw, 337.
 Gwawl, son of Cld, Pwyll's rival for Rhiannon, 284, 285, 303, 362, 380.
 Gweddw, owner of a magic horse, 347.
 Gweir, a form of the name Gwydion, _q.v._, 319, 321, 322.
 Gwenbaus, Sir, 359.
 Gwern, son of Matholwch and Branwen, 291, 292, 293.
 Gwinas, Sir, 359.
 Gwlgawd Gododin, the drinking-horn of, 346.
 Gwragedd Annwn, 393.
 Gwrhyr, a companion of Arthur, 343, 349, 350, 351.
 Gwri of the Golden Hair, 287.
 Gwrnach the Giant, 346, 348.
 Gwyar, wife of Lludd, 323, 338, 369.
 Gwyddneu Garanhir, his dialogue with Gwyn, 255-258;
   his magic basket, 346.
 Gwyddolwyn Gorr, the magic bottles of, 346.
 Gwydion son of Dn, the British Mercury, 260-268, 305, 306, 308-311,
    316, 317, 322, 327, 330, 335, 358, 360, 364, 371, 372, 373, 377;
   druid of the gods, 260;
   father of the sun-god, 261;
   fights the "Battle of the Trees", 306;
   is the British equivalent of the Teutonic Woden, 260;
   his place taken in later myth by Arthur, 316.
 _Gwyl Awst_, the Welsh August festival, 409.
 Gwyllion, 393.
 Gwyn son of Nudd, British god of the Other World, 7, 254-259, 272, 313,
    315, 329, 332, 348, 359, 365, 371, 372, 376, 389-393, 405, 407;
   attributes of, 255;
   his dialogue with Gwyddneu Garanhir, 255-258;
   contends with Gwyn for Lludd's daughter Creudylad, 259;
   is made warder of Hades, 254-255;
   prominent in the Arthur legend, 359;
   becomes king of the Welsh fairies, 392;
   his interview with Saint Collen, 389-391.
 Gwynas, Sir, 359.
 Gwyngelli, a companion of Arthur, 352.
 Gwynhwyvar, 315, 326, 331-333, 334, 364.
   See Guinevere.
 Gwynn Mygddwn, the horse of Gweddw, 347.
 Gwynwas, a form of the name Gwyn, _q.v._, 332, 359.
 Gwyrd Gwent, father of one of the three Gwynhwyvars, 331.
 Gwyrthur, son of Greidawl, contends with Gwyn for Creudylad, 258, 259,
    348, 407;
   father of one of the three Gwynhwyvars, 331.

 Hacket, Castle, 244.
 Hades, the Celtic. See Other World, Celtic.
 Hades, the Greek god, 152, 260.
 "Hades, Head of", a name given to Pwyll, 278, 282.
 Hallowe'en, 40, 153, 407, 410.
 Hamitic languages, 19.
 "Happy Plain", the, 133, 135, 186.
   See Mag Mell.
 Hare held sacred by the Ancient Britons, 417.
 Harlech, 289, 294, 295, 296.
 Harp of the Dagda, 54, 346;
   of Angus, 56;
   of Teirtu, 346.
 Havgan, a king of Annwn, 279, 281.
 Hawthorn, chief of Giants, father of Olwen, 340, 341, 343-345, 349, 353.
 Heifer, a black-maned, called "Ocean", 80, 117, 240;
   the Morrg takes the shape of a, 169-170.
 Hengist, 325.
 Henuinus, Duke of Cornwall, 382, 383.
 Hephstus, the Gaelic, 61, 63, 233.
 Heracles, 158, 276.
 Her, 263.
 Hereford, 299.
 Hergest, the Red Book of, 11, 258, 260, 312, 328, 336, 369.
 Herimon, 40.
   See Eremon.
 "Hero-light", Cuchulainn's, 177, 183.
 "Hero's salmon-leap", Cuchulainn's, 163.
 Hesiod, 65.
 Hesperides, garden of the. See Garden.
 Hesus, a Gaulish god, 52.
 Hevydd the Ancient, father of Rhiannon, 283, 285.
 Hi Dorchaide, 70.
 _Hibbert Lectures_ (for 1886) on _Celtic Heathendom_, Professor Rhys's,
    41, 43, 48, 51, 54, 57, 59, 90, 120, 205, 238, 253, 254, 258, 262,
    264, 268, 271, 277, 282, 284, 307, 313, 318, 324, 325, 331, 377, 408.
 Hill of Uisnech, 69, 324.
 _Historia Britonum_ of Nennius, 9, 336;
   of Geoffrey of Monmouth, 9, 251, 323, 324, 336, 372, 373, 374, 375,
      376, 381, 384, 386.
 Hittites, the, 20.
 Holy Families of Britain, the Three Chief, 386.
 Holy Grail, the. See Grail.
 Holy wells, 414-415.
 Homeric and Celtic civilization compared, 25, 29.
 Hoodie-crow, 52, 53, 169, 271.
 Horse of Manannn mac Lir, 60, 88, 98;
   of Gweddw, 347;
   of Gwyn son of Nudd, 255, 256, 348.
 "Hound of Culann", the, 161, 166;
   hound of Lugh, 63;
   of the king of Ioruaidh, 104;
   hounds of Finn mac Coul, 213;
   hounds of Celtic myth, 225, 280, 391, 392.
 Hull, Miss Eleanor, her _Cuchullin Saga_, 155, 156, 159, 184, 190, 199,
    227.
 Human sacrifices of the Druids, 37, 38;
   to Cromm Cruaich, 38, 39, 40, 400;
   symbolical, 405, 410, 411.
 Huon of Bordeaux, Sir, 7.
 Huxley, Professor, 19.
 Hy-Breasail, 133.

 Iberians, the, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 35, 68, 69, 70, 76, 230, 248, 278;
   their physique, 19;
   language, 19;
   original home, 19;
   state of culture, 20;
   gods, 43, 44, 64.
 Iddawc, the Agitator of Britain, 337, 338.
 Ilbhreach, son of Manannn, 136, 140, 211, 222.
 Iliad, the, 75, 156.
 Illann the Fair, son of Fergus mac Roy, 193, 196-198.
 "Illusion, the Land of", an old name for Dyfed, 279.
 Indech, son of Domnu, a king of the Fomors, 48, 70, 83, 90, 108, 112.
 Inniskea, the Lonely Crane of, 146;
   stone worship in, 415.
 _Invasions, the Book of_, 121.
 _Ioldanach_, the "Master of All Arts", a title of Lugh, 63, 85, 237,
    239.
 Iolo Morganwg, bardic name of Mr. Edward Williams, 372.
 _Iolo MSS._, the, 269, 270, 372, 373, 387, 388, 389.
 Iona, Adamnan, Abbot of, 401.
 Ioruaidhe, 96, 97, 104.
 Ireland, old names of, 125, 126, 150.
   See also Iweridd.
 Iseult, wife of King Mark, 327, 338.
 Island, submarine, 97, 104.
 "Island of the Mighty", a bardic name for Britain, 292.
 Islands, sacred, 326.
 Ith, 121, 122;
   Ith's Plain, 66, 122.
 Iuchar, son of Tuirenn, 90-106.
 Iucharba, son of Tuirenn, 90-106.
 Iweridd, _i.e._ "Ireland", wife of the British sea-god Llyr, 258, 270,
    271.

 Janus, 383.
 Javelin, Red, one of Manannn's spears, 60, 217.
 John, Feast of Saint, 245, 407, 411.
 Jones, the Rev. Edward, on apparitions, 391.
 Joseph of Arimathea, 358, 359, 366.
 Jubainville, M. H. d'Arbois de, 25, 34, 37, 48, 54, 67, 68, 72, 77, 78,
    107, 120, 124, 128, 132, 158, 188, 202.
 Judgment of Amergin, the, 127.
 Julius Caesar, see Caesar.

 Kacmwri, the servant of Arthur, 352, 353.
 Kaerlud, 376.
 Kai, 326, 327, 338, 343, 348, 349, 350, 351.
 Karitia, see Calais.
 Kay, Sir, 6, 326.
 "Keening" invented, 110.
 Kelli Wic, 334.
 _Keltic Researches_, Mr. Nicholson's, 3.
 Kenmare, river, 121.
 Kicva, wife of Pryderi, 289-301.
 Kildare, shrine of St. Bridget at, 228.
 Killaraus, Mount, 324.
 Killarney, Lake, 223, 247.
 "Kingly Castle", see Caer Rigor.
 Kirwans of Castle Hacket, the, 244.
 Knights, King Arthur's, 6, 7, 8, 155, 251, 274, 358, 371.
 Knockainy, 245.
 Knockers, 393, 403.
 Knockma, fairy hill of, 136, 243, 244.
 Knockthierna, 247.
 Knowth, 137, 138.
 Kulhwch, 340, 341, 343, 344, 345, 347, 353.
 _Kulhwch and Olwen_, the tale of, 258, 259, 260, 313, 321, 327, 339,
    340-353, 369, 407.
 Kyndellig, 343.
 Kynedyr Wyllt, 348, 352.

 Labhra, Mider's leech, 213.
 Labraid of the Quick Hand on Sword, 202.
 Lady of the Lake, 361.
 Laeg, Cuchulainn's charioteer, 169, 181, 182, 186.
 Laegaire the Battle-winner, 163.
 Lakes, twelve chief, of Ireland, 88.
 Lamias, 403.
 Lammas, 407.
 Land of Illusion, 279;
   of Happiness, 119, 133;
   of the Living, 133, 335;
   of Promise, 133, 217, 337;
   of Summer, 119, 329;
   of the Young, 133, 225.
 Laon, 277.
 Larminie, Mr. William, 233.
 Launcelot, Sir, 7, 328, 333, 358, 359, 362, 365.
 _Lear, King_, Shakespeare's, 5, 7, 259, 270, 381.
 Lecan, the Book of, 10, 38, 123, 229;
   the Yellow Book of, 10, 164.
 Leicester, 270, 383.
 Leinster, 179, 189.
 Leinster, Mount, 140, 211, 212.
 Leinster, the Book of, 10, 38, 55, 56, 121, 132, 139, 155, 156, 157,
    190, 199, 204, 229.
 Leir, Geoffrey of Monmouth's King, 381-383.
 Leodogrance, father of Guinevere, 357.
 Leprechaun, 247, 248, 393, 403.
 Lr, the Gaelic sea-god, 60, 140, 142-144, 146, 205, 211, 212, 222, 252,
    269;
   his rebellion against Bodb the Red, 140;
   their reconciliation, 142;
   the fate of the children of, 142-146;
   is killed by the Fenian hero Caoilt, 146, 222.
 Levarcham, 196.
 Leyden, 277.
 _Lia Fil_, see Stone of Destiny.
 Liban, 186, 202.
 Lismore, the Book of, 10.
 _Lla Lluanys_, the Manx August festival, 409.
 Llacheu, son of Arthur, 258, 326.
 Llandwynwyn, the church of Dwynwyn (Branwen), in Anglesey, 388.
 Lleminawg, 319.
 Lleu (Llew) Llaw Gyffes, the British sun-god, 261-268, 276, 305, 306,
    322, 323, 325, 330, 335, 360, 364, 369, 370;
   his birth, 261;
   and naming, 263;
   takes part in the Battle of the Trees, 306;
   is changed into an eagle, 266;
   his place taken in later myth by Gwalchmei, 323;
   and in the Arthurian legend by Sir Gawain, 360.
 Llevelys, king of France, 378.
 Lloegyr (Loegria), Saxon Britain, 258, 299, 300, 384.
 Lludd Llaw Ereint, the British Zeus, 252, 253, 254, 259, 312, 315, 323,
    329, 332, 350, 359, 364, 375-381, 407;
   his wife Gwyar, 323;
   puts an end to the "Three Plagues of Britain", 377-380;
   founds London, 376;
   appears in the Morte Darthur as King Lot of Orkney, 359.
 Llwyd, son of Kilcoed, avenges Gwawl, son of Cld, 303, 304.
 Llwyr, son of Llwyrion, the magic vessel of, 346.
 Llyn Llyw, the salmon of, 350.
 Llyr, the British sea-god, 252, 259, 269, 270, 271, 273, 289, 290, 304,
    313, 316, 338, 381, 383, 386;
   possibly borrowed from the Gaels, 270;
   becomes the "King Leir" of Geoffrey of Monmouth, 381;
   and the "King Lear" of Shakespeare, 270, 381;
   founds a family of saints, 386;
   his tomb or temple at Leicester, 383.
 Llyr-cestre, 270, 283.
 _Llys Dn_, 252, 317.
 Llywarch Hn, a sixth-century British poet, 11.
 Loch, a warrior slain by Cuchulainn, 169-170.
 Lochlann (Lochlin), 97, 205, 372;
   Lochlannach, the, 205, 211.
 London, 294, 296, 376, 377.
 Londres, 376.
 Lot or Loth, king of Orkney, 359, 364, 375.
 Loucetius, a war-god worshipped in Britain, 275.
 _Lough Corrib, its Shores and Islands_, Sir William Wilde's, 76.
 Lough Gur, 246.
 Lucan, the Roman poet, 52.
 Luchtain, the carpenter of the Tuatha D Danann, 61, 84, 86, 109.
 Lud, king of Britain, 5, 7, 376-381.
 Ludesgata, Ludgate, 5, 254, 376.
 Lugaid, son of Curoi, 179, 182, 183.
 Lugh Lamhfada, the Gaelic sun-god, 62-63, 84-90, 93-97, 103, 105, 106,
    111-113, 115-117, 136, 139, 156, 157, 160, 170, 201, 230, 233,
    238-240, 262, 276, 325, 339, 344, 345, 370, 371;
   his spear, 63, 71, 97;
   his hound, 63, 97;
   his rod-sling and chain, 62;
   his first appearance at Tara, 84;
   gains the title of _Ioldanach_, 85;
   avenges his father's murder upon the sons of Tuirenn, 94-106;
   leads the Tuatha D Danann against the Fomors, 111;
   prophecies to Conn the Hundred Fighter, 201.
 _Lugnassad_, "Lugh's Commemoration", 277, 409.
 _Lugudunum_, "town of Lugus", 277, 409.
 Lugus, the Gaulish sun-god, 42, 276, 409.
 Lundy Island, 272, 322.
 Lydney, temple of Nodens at, 254;
   monograph upon it, 254.
 Lyons, 277, 409.

 Mab, Queen, 246.
 Mabinogi, the Four Branches of the, 14, 15, 355.
 Mabinogion, 12, 14, 16, 356, 372, 377, 403, 407.
   See also Guest, Lady Charlotte.
 Mabon, a British sun-god, 276, 328, 330, 335, 338, 347, 349-352, 387.
 Macaulay, 22.
 Mac Cecht, a king of the Tuatha D Danann, 122, 125, 126, 130.
 Mac Cuill, a king of the Tuatha D Danann, 122, 125, 126, 130.
 Mac Gee, Thomas D'Arcy, 232.
 Mac Grein, a king of the Tuatha D Danann, 122, 125, 126, 130.
 Mac Kineely, 238-239.
 Mac Moineanta, a king of the Irish fairies, 242.
 Mac Nia, an old Irish poet, 138.
 _Mac Oc_, "Son of the Young", a title of Angus, 56, 139.
 MacPherson's _Ossian_, 203.
 Mac Samthainn, 238.
 Macha, a war-goddess of the Gaels, 52, 72, 112;
   meaning of her name, 52;
   "Macha's acorn-crop", 53;
   is killed by Balor, 112.
 Macleod, Miss Fiona, 241.
 Maelmuiri, scribe of the Book of the Dun Cow, 10.
 Maelon, 388.
 Maenor Alun, 310;
   Maenor Penarth, 310.
 Maen Tyriawc, the grave of Pryderi, 311.
 Maglaunus, Duke of Albania, 382, 383.
 _Mag Mell_, the "Happy Plain", a name for the Celtic Elysium, 133, 135.
 _Mag Mon_, the "Plain of Sports", a name for the Celtic Elysium, 134.
 Mag Slecht, human sacrifices at, 38-40, 132, 154.
 Mag Tuireadh, see Moytura.
 Magog, 229.
 Malory, Sir Thomas, 323, 328, 330, 333, 354-357, 359-364, 367, 368.
 Malvasius, king of Iceland, 376.
 Man, Isle of, 23, 24, 57, 60, 175, 241, 261, 272, 273, 408, 409.
 Manannn son of Lr, a Gaelic god, 60-61, 89, 98, 129, 134, 136, 140,
    143, 157, 186, 188, 199, 202, 203, 205, 217, 224, 233, 235-237, 239,
    240-242, 270, 371, 405;
   his armour, 60, 88;
   weapons, 60, 217;
   horse, 60, 89, 98;
   mantle, 61, 129, 188, 217, 221;
   pigs, 61, 98;
   his "Feast of Age", 61, 143;
   lord of the Celtic Paradise, 134;
   his wife Fand in love with Cuchulainn, 186-188;
   his friendship with Cormac, king of Ireland, 203;
   his message to Saint Columba, 240-241;
   his connection with the Isle of Man, 60, 241-242.
 Manawyddan son of Llyr, his British analogue, 270, 271, 273, 289, 290,
    293, 294, 296, 298-304, 313, 315, 317, 321, 338, 352, 373;
   his attributes, 270-271;
   accompanies Brn to Ireland, 289-294;
   marries Rhiannon, 298;
   defeats the magic of Llwyd, son of Kilcoed, 301-304;
   constructs the bone-prison of Oeth and Anoeth, 270;
   helps Arthur in the chase of Twrch Trwyth, 352.
 Maponos, a Gallo-British sun-god, 276, 328.
 March, a British god of the Under World, 316, 327, 329, 335, 338.
 Mark, King, 327, 328.
 Mars, 51, 204.
 "Master of All Arts", see _Ioldanach_.
 Mth, a British god, brother to Dn, 260, 265, 266, 268, 308, 310, 322,
    329, 360, 361, 364;
   meaning of his name, 260;
   teaches magic to Gwydion, 260;
   rules from Caer Dathyl, 308;
   compared with Merlin, 360, 361, 362.
 Matholwch, king of Ireland, 289-293.
 Mthonwy, father of Mth, 260, 308.
 _Matire de Bretagne_, the, 363, 365.
 Matthew Arnold, 3, 16, 356.
 May Day, 123, 259, 287, 407.
 May Eve, 377, 407.
 Maypole, 408.
 Meadha, the _sdh_ of, 136, 212, 243.
 Meath, 179.
 Medb, queen of Connaught, 147, 154, 164-168, 170, 171, 172, 175, 178,
    179, 183, 200, 246;
   makes war on Ulster to get the Brown Bull of Cualgne, 165-166;
   becomes a fairy queen, 246;
   is perhaps the original of "Queen Mab", 246.
 Mediterranean race, 19;
   _Mediterranean Race, The_, Prof. Sergi's, 20.
 Medrawt, 315, 323, 332, 333, 334, 337, 360, 364.
 Meleaus, or Melias, de Lile, Sir, 359.
 Melga, king of the Picts, 375.
 Meliagaunce, or Meliagraunce, Sir, 359, 365, 407.
 Melwas, 329, 332, 359, 365, 407.
 Menai Straits, the, 262, 264.
 Menw, 343, 344, 351.
 Mercurius Artaius, a Gallo-Roman god, 274, 313.
 Mercury, 274, 313.
 Merlin, 324, 325, 339, 360, 361, 364.
   See Myrddin.
 Mesgegra, king of Leinster, 147, 154.
 Meyer, Dr. Kuno, 38, 134, 154, 184, 190.
 Miach, son of Diancecht, 62, 80-82, 232.
 Midas, the British, 328.
 Mider, Gaelic god of the Under World, 56, 57, 117, 136, 140, 142,
    147-151, 154, 157, 175, 179, 205, 211-213, 224, 243, 331-333;
   rebels against Bodb the Red, 140;
   gambles with Eochaid Airem for possession of Etain, 149;
   is besieged in his _sdh_, and helped by the Fenians, 211-213.
 Midsummer Day, 75, 406, 407.
 Midsummer Eve, 242.
 Mil, the ancestor of the Gaels, 122, 123, 126, 129, 130, 132, 146, 153.
 Milesians, the, 76, 125-127, 129, 145, 153, 229, 230, 243.
 "Milky Way", the, 62, 253, 268.
 Minerva, 275, 277, 413.
 Minos, 153.
 Miodhchaoin, 97, 105, 106.
 Mistletoe, 18, 33.
 Mithras, a Persian sun-god worshipped at York, 275.
 Mochdrev, 310.
 Mochnant, 310.
 Modron, wife of Urien and mother of Mabon, 328, 338.
 Mona, see Anglesey.
 Mongan, an Ulster prince, a reincarnation of Finn mac Coul, 37.
 Monmouth, Geoffrey of. See Geoffrey.
 Morc, son of Dela, a king of the Fomors, 67, 327.
 Mordred, Sir, 315, 334, 360, 364, 374, 375.
 Morgawse, sister to Arthur, 323.
 Morrg, the, Gaelic goddess of war, 52, 53, 72, 87, 98, 107, 113, 117,
    139, 157, 168-170, 323;
   description of, 52;
   her dealings with Cuchulainn on the Tin B Chuailgne, 168-170.
 Morte Darthur, Sir Thomas Malory's, 7, 272, 276, 323, 328, 334, 354,
    362, 364-368, 372, 407.
 "Mound, Lord of the", 41, 403.
 Mountains of Ireland, the twelve chief, 87.
 Mourie, "Saint", 413.
 Mouse, Manawyddan and the, 301-304.
 Moyle, Sea of, 144, 145.
 Moytura, Northern, Battle of, 11, 107-117, 157, 407;
   Southern, Battle of, 72-77, 114.
 Muirthemne, 90, 93, 166, 181.
 Munster, 69, 164, 218, 244, 245.
 Murias, a city of the Tuatha D Danann, 71, 72.
 Mur y Castell, Lleu's palace near Bala Lake, 265, 268.
 Myrddin, a British Zeus, 323-325, 329, 360, 362, 369;
   gave its first name to Britain, 323;
   his wife Elen, 323;
   his town Carmarthen, 324;
   appears in Geoffrey of Monmouth and in the Morte Darthur as Merlin,
      _q.v._
 Myrddin, a sixth-century British bard, 11.
 Mythology, importance of, 1;
   Greek, 1, 2, 4, 403;
   Scandinavian, 3;
   Celtic, its influence on English literature, 6, 7;
   on medival chivalric romance, 184.

 Name, ancient British superstitions with regard to, 263.
 _Names, Choice of_, The. See _Coir Anmann_.
 Names, early of Britain, 292, 323;
   of Ireland, 126, 150, 151.
 Nant Call, 310.
 Nant y Llew, 267.
 Naoise, son of Usnach, 191-193, 195-198.
 Narberth, 279, 281, 282, 283, 288, 298, 300.
 Navan Fort, 158.
 Neamhuainn, Clann, 216, 218.
 Neath, Vale of, 255, 335, 392.
 Nedd, river, 405.
 Neevougi, a stone worshipped at Inniskea, 415.
 Nemed, 67-69, 274;
   the race of, 229, 230, 327, 406.
 Nemetona, a war-goddess worshipped at Bath, 275, 276.
 Nemon, a Gaelic war-goddess, wife of Nuada, 52, 276.
 Nennius, his _History of the Britons_, 9, 336.
 Nentres, King, 357, 362.
 Nereids, 403.
 Nt, an Iberian god, 64.
 New Grange, 137-139.
 Nia, the Plain of, 73.
 Niamh of the Golden Hair, daughter of Manannn, 223-225.
 Nicholson's _Keltic Researches_, 3.
 _Niebelungenlied_, 393.
 Nimue, 358, 361, 362.
 Nissyen, son of Penardun, 290, 293.
 Niul, 120.
 Noah, descent of the Gaelic gods and men from, 329.
 Nodens, a temple to, at Lydney, 253.
 "Northern Crown", constellation of the, 252.
 _Nos galan-gaeof_, the Welsh winter festival, 408.
 Nuada of the Silver Hand, a Gaelic Zeus, 51, 52, 74, 75, 78, 80, 81,
    83-86, 93, 94, 105, 122, 157, 230, 253, 276, 323;
   his sword, 51, 71;
   his wives, 52;
   his hand cut off in battle, 75;
   a silver hand made for him by Diancecht, 78;
   his own hand renewed by Miach and Airmid, 81;
   his death at the hands of Balor, 112;
   his tomb at Grianan Aileach, 122, 157.
 Nudd, British god, 252, 253, 254, 313;
   to be identified with Lludd, _q.v._
 Nutt, Mr. Alfred, 12, 37, 38, 134, 154, 158, 164, 318, 348.
 Nwyvre, 322, 364.
 Nynniaw, son of Beli, 268, 269, 313.

 Oak, held sacred by the Druids, 33.
 Oberon, 7, 392.
 "Ocean", a black-maned heifer called, 80, 240.
 Ochall Ochne, king of the Sdhe of Connaught, 164.
 Ochren, battle of, 305;
   Caer, 320;
   see Achren.
 Octriallach, son of Indech, 110;
   the "Cairn of Octriallach", 110.
 O'Curry, Eugene, 37, 56, 63, 72, 78, 89, 93, 111, 113, 137, 138, 146,
    151, 152, 155, 188, 201, 204.
 Odin, 260.
 O'Donaghue, the, 247.
 O'Donovan, 238.
 Oeth and Anoeth, the Bone-prison of, 270, 271, 317, 373.
 O'Flynn, Eochaid, an old Irish poet, 231.
 Ogam, writings in, 58, 93, 151, 189.
 Ogma, Gaelic god of Literature and Eloquence, 57-60, 79, 80, 82, 84, 85,
    112, 116, 117, 122, 136, 139, 157, 276;
   his wife and children, 57;
   his epithets of "Cermait" and "Grianainech", 57, 59;
   his great strength, 59;
   kills Indech in the battle of Moytura, 112;
   inventor of the ogam alphabet, 58.
 Ogmios, a Gaulish god, 276.
 O'Grady, Standish Hayes, Mr., 28, 159, 201, 203, 205, 207, 213, 215,
    222.
 Ogyrvran, a British god of the Under World, father of Gwynhwyvar,
    329-331, 357, 366.
 O'Herlebys, wooden idol of the, 413.
 Old Plain, the, 66.
 Old Sarum, 29, 386.
 Olwen, 340, 341, 343, 345, 353.
 Onagh, queen of the Irish fairies, 243, 244.
 _Origins of English History_, Mr. Elton's, 6, 8, 25, 26, 70, 228, 327,
    413.
 Orkneys, 386;
   King Lot of Orkney, 359.
 Oscar, son of Ossian, 208, 212, 217, 222, 246, 315.
 Osla Big-Knife, 352, 353.
 _Ossian_, MacPherson's, 203.
 Ossian, son of Finn mac Coul, 11, 208, 212, 214, 215, 217, 220, 223-227,
    246, 318, 337.
 "Ossianic ballads", 205, 208, 213;
   Ossianic Society, see _Transactions_.
 Other World, the Celtic, 65, 68, 71, 98, 119, 121, 133-136, 150, 151,
    175, 176, 201, 202, 203, 224, 252, 255, 270, 271, 272, 273, 278, 279,
    281, 305, 307, 316, 317, 318-322, 329, 334, 336, 366, 387, 389, 395;
   different names of, 133, 318-320;
   descriptions of, 136, 150-151, 224;
   variously imagined as upon the sea, 202, 224, 272, 394;
   under the sea, 305;
   under the earth, 135-136;
   upon earth, 271, 272, 273, 278, 279;
   original abode of men, 119;
   visited by Cuchulainn, 175-176, 186;
   Conn, 201;
   Connla, 202;
   Ossian, 224;
   Pwyll, 281;
   Gwydion, 305;
   Arthur, 317-320.
   See also Annwn, Avilion, Happy Plain, Mag Mell, Mag Mon, Land of
      Happiness, of the Living, of Promise, of Summer, of the Young.
 Ousel of Cilgwri, 349.
 Ovid's _Metamorphoses_, 393.
 Owain, son of Urien, 328, 330;
   Sir Owain, 363.
 Owl, of Cwm Cawlwyd, 349;
   Blodeuwedd changed into an, 268.
 Ox, the brindled, 320, 321;
   oxen, magic, 345.
 Oxford, 379.

 Paradise, the Celtic.
   See Other World, Celtic.
 Parthludd, 254, 376.
 Partholon, 65-68, 386; race of, 229, 230, 406.
 Patrick, Saint, 8, 40, 41, 132, 145, 222, 225, 226, 227, 242, 401, 402.
 Paul's Cathedral, Saint, 254.
 Pausanias's _Description of Greece_, 36.
 Pedigree of the gods, 229;
   of Finn mac Coul, 204.
 Pedryvan, Caer, 319, 356, 367.
 Peel Castle, 242.
 Peibaw, son of Beli, 268, 269, 313.
 Pelasgoi, 20.
 Peleur, King, 368.
 Pellam, King, 358, 364.
 Pellean, King, 358.
 Pelleas, Sir, 358, 368;
   _Pelleas and Ettarre_, Tennyson's Idyll of, 358.
 Pelles, King, 357, 362, 367.
 Pellinore, King, 362.
 _Pembroke, County Guardian_, the, 394.
 Pembrokeshire, 273, 278, 394.
 _Pen Annwn_, the "Head of Hades", a title of Pwyll, 278, 282.
 Penardun, daughter of Beli and wife of Llyr, 269, 270, 289, 290, 293.
 Pendaran Dyfed, 288, 295.
 Pendragon, meaning of the word, 330.
 Pennant, 409.
 Percivale, Sir, 359, 363, 368, 369.
 Peredur, 330, 368, 369.
 Perilous glens, the, 163.
 Persephon, the British, 259, 260.
 Persia, 274;
   Pisear, king of, 96, 97, 101-103.
 Petrie, Dr., 72, 98, 114.
 Picts, 23, 230, 401, 417.
 Pigs, in the Celtic Other World, 136;
   of Manannn, 61, 63;
   of Easal, king of the Golden Pillars, 96, 97, 103;
   of Pryderi, 308, 316, 327;
   of March, 316, 327;
   of Angus, 214;
   Cian changed into a pig, 91.
 Pigskin of King Tuis, the, 96, 99, 100.
 Pillars, king of the Golden. See Easal.
 Pisear, king of Persia, 96, 97, 101-103.
 Pixies, 393.
 Plain of Ill Luck, 163;
   of the Sea, 72;
   of Adoration, 38;
   the Old, 66.
 Pliny, 33, 35, 400.
 Plutarch, 326.
 Pluto, the Gaelic, 57;
   the Cambrian, 260.
 Poetry, the Gaelic goddess of, 56;
   cauldron of inspiration and, 365-370.
 Policy of the Christian Church towards objects of pagan worship, 417.
 Pookas, 247, 248, 393, 403, 405.
 Porsena, a Roman consul, 385.
 Poseidon, 52, 260;
   the Gaelic, 60;
   the British, 269.
 Posidonius, 26.
 Prophecy of Badb, 117-118;
   of Eriu, 125-126;
   of the seeress to Queen Medb, 166;
   of Lugh to Conn the Hundred-Fighter, 201-202;
   of Cathbad concerning Cuchulainn, 161;
   concerning Deirdre, 190-191.
 Pryderi, son of Pwyll and Rhiannon, 273, 286-288, 289, 294, 295,
    298-301, 303-305, 308, 309-311, 313, 315, 316, 319, 321, 327, 335,
    358, 364, 366, 368, 377, 407;
   is stolen at birth, 286;
   meaning of his name, 288;
   accompanies Brn to Ireland, 289-294;
   is spirited away by Llwyd and recovered by Manawyddan, 300-304;
   receives a present of pigs from Annwn, 308;
   is killed by Gwydion, 311;
   appears in Arthurian legend, 358.
 Prydwen, Arthur's ship, 319, 320, 352.
 Puck, 393.
 Puffin Island, 322.
 _Pursuit of Diarmait and Grainne, The_, 215-221.
 Pwccas, 393.
 Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed and "Head of Annwn", 273, 274, 278-288, 298, 303,
    304, 305, 308, 316, 319, 329, 357-358, 366, 367, 380;
   changes shapes with Arawn, king of Annwn, 281;
   his wooing of Rhiannon, 282-286;
   is owner of a magic cauldron in Hades, 321;
   and keeper of the Holy Grail in the Morte Darthur, 357-358.
 Pwynt Maen Dulan, 262.

 Queen Guinevere, 315, 334, 357, 359, 365, 375, 407.
 "Queen Mab", 246.
 Queen of the Irish fairies, 243, 244;
   of the fairies of Munster, 244;
   of the fairies of North Munster, 244;
   of the fairies of South Munster, 244.
 _Queene, The Fairie_, Spenser's, 7.
 Quicken-tree, the magic, 219.

 Races of Britain, the, 19-21.
 Rathconrath, 69.
 "Realm of Glamour, The", a name for Dyfed, 279.
 Re-birth of Cuchulainn, 37;
   of Finn mac Coul, 37.
 Red Book of Hergest, see Hergest.
 Red Branch Champions of Ulster, the, 4, 147, 157, 167, 183, 191, 192,
    204, 227, 314.
 Red Branch House, the, 29, 196, 197.
 Red Dragon of Britain, the, 378.
 Redynvre, the stag of, 349.
 Regan, daughter of King Leir, 381, 382.
 Religion, Aryan, 32, 47.
 Retaliator, the, the sword of Manannn mac Lir, 60, 198.
 Revelry, the Castle of, 319, 366.
 Revolving Castle, the, 319, 366.
 _Revue Celtique_, 40, 53, 78, 107, 117, 142, 158, 184, 190, 201, 241,
    246.
 Rhiannon, a British goddess, 273, 282-288, 298, 300, 301, 303, 304, 358,
    361, 362, 407;
   her three magic birds, 273, 294, 296;
   her name afterwards corrupted into Nimue and Vivien, 358, 361.
 Rhinnon Rhin Barnawd, the magic bottles of, 346.
 Rhonabwy, 336, 337, 338;
   The _Dream of Rhonabwy_, 312, 337, 338.
 Rhyd y Groes, a ford on the Severn, 337.
 Rhys, Professor, 22, 23, 35, 41, 44, 64, 68, 158, 205, 254, 256, 262,
    282, 289, 307, 313, 316, 318, 319, 324, 331, 335, 352, 363, 370, 395,
    404, 413, 414.
   See also _Arthurian Legend_ and _Hibbert Lectures_.
 Ri, Roi, an Iberian god, 64.
 Ribble, the river, 413, 414.
 Riches, the Castle of, 367.
 Rience, King, 357.
 Rigor, Caer, 319.
 Rigosamos, a war-god worshipped in Britain, 275.
 Ritual, remains of Celtic, 405-412.
 Rivers, the twelve chief, of Ireland, 88.
 Rivers, the worship of, 413, 414.
 Rodrubn, the _sdh_ of Lugh, 136.
 Romans, the, 23, 24, 25, 373, 385, 386, 399, 413.
 Rome, 5, 155, 274, 315, 317.
 Ronan, Clann, 218.
 Round Table, King Arthur's, 6, 314.
 "Round Towers", the, attributed to Goibniu, 233.
 Rowan-tree, 219, 410.
 Ruadan, son of Bress and Brigit, 109-110.
 _Rude Stone Monuments_, Fergusson's, 76, 114, 137, 138.
 Ryons, King, 357.

 Sacred animals, 406, 416, 417;
   islands, 326;
   fish, 416;
   frogs, 416;
   stones, 406, 415, 417;
   trees, 406, 415;
   wells, 414-416.
 Sacrifices of animals, 406, 412;
   human, 18, 37-40, 399;
   symbolical human sacrifices, 405, 410, 411.
 Sadb, daughter of Bodb the Red, and mother of Ossian, 208.
 "Sage's seat", the, 85, 86.
 St. Catherine's Hill, 29;
   St. George's Hill, 29.
 St. Gall MS., the, 232.
 Saints, transformation of Celtic gods into, 6, 228, 229, 372, 386, 389.
 Salisbury Plain, 325.
 Salmon of Knowledge, the, 55, 210;
   of Llyn Llyw, 350.
 Samhain, the Celtic winter festival, 40, 42, 67, 107, 108, 286, 406,
    407, 408, 410, 411.
 _Samhanach_, 408.
 Sarn Elen, 324.
 Sarrlog, 386;
   Caer Sarrlog, 386.
 Satires, magical, 83, 87, 172, 182.
 Scathach the Amazon, 163, 164, 172, 173, 176.
 Scn, the river, 121.
 Scot, Eber, a mythical ancestor of the Gaels, 120.
 Scota, 120.
 Scotti, 357.
 Sea, Celtic ideas regarding the, 48, 261, 270.
 _Second Battle of Moytura, The_, the Harleian MS. called, 50, 54, 72,
    78, 107.
 _Seint Greal_, the, 322, 326, 368.
 Senchan Torpeist, 14.
 _Sen Mag_, see Old Plain.
 Serapis worshipped at York, 275.
 Setanta, original name of Cuchulainn, 160, 161.
 Severn, the river, 254, 337, 350, 352, 353.
 Sgeolan, one of Finn's hounds, 213.
 "Shadowy Town, or City", 175, 366.
 Shakespeare, 5, 259, 270, 381, 393, 408.
 Shannon, the river, 88, 165, 292.
 "Shape-shifting", 37.
 Sharvan the Surly, 219.
 Shield, Conchobar's magic, 197.
 Shony, a Hebridean sea-god, 410.
 Shouts on a hill, the three, 94, 97, 105, 106.
 Sicily, 96, 102.
 _Sdh_ Airceltrai, 136;
   Bodb, 136;
   Eas Aedha Ruaidh, 136;
   Fionnachaidh, 136, 140, 142, 146, 222;
   Meadha, 136, 243;
   Rodrubn, 136.
 _Sdhe_, "fairy mounds", 135, 136, 139, 181.
 _Sdhe, The_, the Gaelic gods, or fairies, 136, 223, 244, 246.
 Sidi, Caer, 319, 321, 322, 368.
 Silures, tribe of the, 22.
 Silurian race, the, 19.
 Silver Hand, Nuada's, 51, 78, 81, 253;
   Lludd's, 253.
 Sinann, goddess of the Shannon, 56.
 Skene, Dr. W. F., 71, 123, 256, 258, 311, 312, 316, 317, 319, 328, 334.
 Skye, Isle of, 163.
 Slecht, Mag. See Mag Slecht.
 Slieve Bloom, 209;
   Slieve Fuad, 136;
   Slieve Mish, 130.
 Smallpox, goddess of the, 413.
 Snowdon, 267, 305, 335, 380.
 Sol Apollo Anicetus, a sun-god worshipped at Bath, 275.
 Solar festivals of the Celts, 41, 405-412.
 Solinus, Caius Julius, 228.
 Somerset, 329.
 "Son of the Young", see Mac Oc.
 Sore, the river, 383.
 _Sorrowful Stories of Erin, The Three_, 106.
 Spain, 22, 121;
   used as an euphemism for the Celtic Other World, 68, 120, 121, 230,
      386.
 Spear of Lugh, 62, 97;
   of Pisear, king of Persia, 96, 97, 101, 103.
 "Spearman with the Long Shaft", 369.
 Speech, Aryan, 21, 31.
 Spenser, 7, 389.
 Spey, the river, 414.
 "Splendid Mane", the horse of Manannn mac Lir, 60, 88, 98.
 _Spoiling of Annwn, The_, a poem of Taliesin, 306, 317-321, 366.
 "Spring of Health", the, 110.
 Sreng, a warrior of the Fir Bolgs, 75.
 Stag of Redynvre, the, 349.
 Stokes, Dr. Whitley, 40, 50, 72, 78, 107, 152, 190, 203, 417.
 Stone, Black, of Arddhu, 305;
   Coronation, 71;
   of Destiny, 72;
   of Kineely, 239.
 Stones, worship of, 406, 415.
 Stonehenge, 42, 324, 325.
 Strabo, 22, 399.
 Strachey, Sir Edward, 356.
 _Study of Celtic Literature_, Matthew Arnold's, 3, 16, 356.
 Sualtam, the mortal father of Cuchulainn, 159, 160, 173, 174.
 Suir, the river, 165.
 Sul, a goddess worshipped at Bath, 228, 275.
 "Summer, the Land of", _i.e._ the Celtic Other World, 119, 329.
 Sun, worship of the, 41, 42;
   Cuchulainn a personification of the, 158-159.
 Swans, Caer and Angus take the forms of, 141-142;
   the children of Lr changed into, 143;
   Mider and Etain become, 151.
 Sword, of Manannn, 60, 198;
   of Nuada, 51;
   of Gwrnach the Giant, 346, 348.
 Swinburne, 6.
 Swineherds, the rival, 164-165.

 Table Round, the, 6, 354, 371.
 Taboos, Celtic. See Destiny, _Geasa_.
 Tacitus, 22, 24, 387, 400.
 Tailtiu, the Gaelic gods defeated by the Milesians at, 130.
 _Tin B Chuailgn_, 10, 14, 28, 159, 164, 175.
 Taliesin, 11, 123, 124, 261, 271, 273, 294, 296, 306, 317, 318, 320,
    321, 328, 356, 366, 367.
 Taliesin, the Book of, 11, 123, 261, 271, 273, 306, 317, 318, 321, 328.
 Tallacht, burial-place of Partholon's people, 66.
 Tara, 29, 72, 84, 93, 98, 105, 125, 126, 129, 147, 153, 189, 190, 216,
    230.
 Taran, 294.
 Taranis, 294.
 _Tathlum_, a sling-stone, 112, 113.
 Taw, a river in South Wales, sacred to Gwyn ap Nudd, 257, 279, 392,
    405.
 Tegla's well, Saint, 415.
 Teirnyon Twryf Vliant, 287, 288, 358, 407.
 Teirtu, the harp of, 346.
 Telltown, see Tailtiu.
 Temple of Nodens at Lydney, 253-254;
   St. Paul's cathedral occupying the site of a, 254;
   sacrifices of cattle on the site of a, 413;
   ancient British temples still standing in the sixth century, 400.
 Tennyson, 6, 133, 260, 274, 297, 312, 354, 355, 358, 361, 362.
 "Terrace cultivation", 20.
 "Terrestrial gods and goddesses", 156.
 "Terrible Broom, The", name of the banner of Oscar's battalion, 209.
 Tethra, a king of the Fomors, 83, 90.
 Teutates, a god of the Gauls, 51, 52.
 Thames, the river, 254.
 Theseus, 153.
 Thirteen Treasures of Britain, the, 313, 326, 339, 340.
 Three Birds of Rhiannon, the, 273, 94, 296.
 Three Chief Holy Families of Britain, 386.
 Three Counselling Knights of Arthur, 312.
 Three Cows of Mider, 57, 176.
 Three Cranes of Denial and Churlishness, 57.
 Three Criminal Resolutions of Britain, 334.
 Three Etains, 331.
 Three Frivolous Battles of Britain, 334.
 Three Generous Heroes of Britain, 253.
 Three Gwynhwyvars, 333.
 Three Paramount Prisoners of Britain, 350-351.
 Three Plagues of Britain, 253, 377-380.
 Three shouts on a hill, 94, 97, 105, 106.
 Three Sorrowful Stories of Erin, 106.
 Three War-knights of Arthur, 312.
 Three Wicked Uncoverings of Britain, 297.
 Tiberius, the Emperor, 400.
 Tigernmas, a mythical Irish king, 153-154.
 Tighernach, an old Irish chronicler, 204.
 _Tir nam beo_, see Land of the Living.
 _Tir nan og_, see Land of the Young.
 _Tir Tairngir_, see Land of Promise.
 Titania, 393.
 Tomb of the Dagda, 138.
 Tombs of the Tuatha D Danann, 138-139.
 Torpeist, Senchan. See Senchan.
 Tory Island, 49, 67, 238.
 Toutates, a war-god worshipped in Britain, 275.
 Tower Hill, Brn's head buried at, 294, 296, 331.
 _Transactions of the Ossianic Society_, 124, 127, 128, 201, 203, 211,
    213, 215, 223, 226.
 Transmigration of souls, 36;
   of the swineherds, 164-165.
 Treasures of Britain, the Thirteen, 313, 326, 339, 340.
 Trees, the Battle of the, 123, 305-308.
 Trees, worship of, 406.
 Triads, 11, 253, 273, 331, 334, 350, 351.
 Trim, 175.
 Trinity Well, the source of the Boyne, 55.
 Trinovantum, _i.e._ New Troy, a mythic name of London, 376, 385.
 Tristrem, Sir, 6, 327, 363.
 Trouveres, the, 363.
 Troy, 374.
 Tuatha D Danann, the gods of the ancient Gaels, 11, 17, 48, 50, 51, 58,
    59, 60, 65, 70-79, 82-86, 91, 95, 97, 104, 108-112, 114, 115, 117,
    123, 125, 126, 129, 132, 136-138, 140, 141, 145, 153, 154, 156, 157,
    205, 211, 214, 217, 219, 222, 225, 228, 229-231, 243, 246, 252, 269,
    276, 312, 330, 393, 403, 404, 406, 410;
   their arrival in Ireland, 71, 72;
   their battle with the Fomors, 108-117;
   are conquered by the Milesians, 130;
   retire into underground palaces, 135, 136;
   and become the fairies of Irish belief, 137.
 Tuirenn, son of Ogma, 57, 90, 106.
 "Tuirenn, the Fate of the Sons of", 90-106.
 Tuis, king of Greece, 96, 98, 102.
 "Turning Castle", 322.
 Tweed, the river, 23, 414.
 Twr Branwen, 289.
 Twrch Trwyth, the hunting of, 347-353.
 _Tylwyth Teg_, the Welsh fairies, 255.
 Tynwald Hill, 412.
 Tyrian Hercules worshipped at Corbridge, 275.

 Uaman, _sdh_ of, 141.
 Uaran Garad, spring of, 165.
 Uffern, the "Cold Place", a name for Annwn, 319.
 Uisnech, the hill of, 69, 324.
 Ulster, 29, 57, 64, 69, 76, 158, 164, 165, 166, 171, 174, 175, 180, 183,
    188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 217, 245.
 "Undry", the name of the Dagda's cauldron, 54, 366.
 Unius, the river, 107.
 Unsenn, the river, 112.
 _Urddawl Ben_, see Venerable Head.
 Urien, an Under World king, 328, 329, 357, 376;
   Uriens, Urience, King, in the Morte Darthur, 357;
   Urianus, King, in Geoffrey of Monmouth's _History_, 376.
 Usnach, the sons of, 191-200.
 _Uther Ben_, the "Wonderful Head", a name for Brn, 296, 330, 356.
 Uther Pendragon, Arthur's father, 330, 356.

 Val des Fes, in the forest of Brcilien, 361.
 Vandwy, Caer, 257, 320.
 Varro, 26.
 Vedwyd, Caer, 319.
 "Venerable Head, The", 296.
 _Verses of the Graves of the Warriors, The_, 272, 311, 334.
 "Victor, son of Scorcher". See Gwyrthur, son of Greidawl.
 _Vita Columb_, Adamnan's, 401, 417.
 Vivien, 358, 361.

 Wales, the Four Ancient Books of, 11, 15.
   See Skene.
 Walgan, 375.
 Wall, Roman, 25, 273, 274, 400.
 War-chariots, 27;
   Cuchulainn's, 28.
 Warrefield, 242.
 "Water-dress", Brian's, 104.
 Waves, the Four, of Britain, 261.
 "Wave-sweeper", Manannn's boat, 60, 98, 104.
 Weapons of the Celts, 27.
 Wells, worship of, 414, 415;
   holy, 414.
 Welsh fairies, 255, 392-394.
 Westminster, 407;
   Westminster Abbey, 71.
 White Dragon of the Saxons, 378.
 White-horned Bull of Connaught, 165, 175.
 White Mount in London, see Tower Hill.
 White-tusk, king of the Boars, 346, 349.
 Wild Huntsman, the, 255.
 Wilde, Sir William, his _Lough Corrib_, 76;
   Lady Wilde's _Ancient Legends of Ireland_, 243, 409.
 Williams, Mr. Edward. See Iolo Morganwg.
 Wish Hounds, the, 392.
 Woden, 260.
 Wolf, the Morrg takes the shape of a, 170.
 Women, position of, among the Celts, 30.
 "Wonderful Head", the, 296, 330.
 "Wood of the Two Tents", the, 216.
 Wordsworth, 4, 5.
 Wren, Lleu and the, 263;
   a bird of augury among the druids, 417.
 Wydyr, Caer, 320.
 Wye, the river, 352.

 Yeats', Mr., The _Wanderings of Oisin_, 223.
 Yell, or Yeth, Hounds, the, 392.
 Yellow Book of Lecan, the, 10, 164.
 "Yellow Shaft", one of Manannn's spears, 60, 217.
 Ynys Avallon, 329.
   See Avilion, Glastonbury.
 Ynys Branwen, 295.
 Ynys Wair, 322.
   See Lundy Island.
 York, 275.
 Young, Land of the, 133, 225;
   Son of the, see Mac Oc.
 Yspaddaden Penkawr, see Hawthorn, Chief of Giants.

 Zeus, 65, 260, 261;
   the Gaelic, 41, 51, 253;
   the British, 5, 324.
 Zimmer, Professor, 152.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber's note:

Variations in accented characters have been retained.

Format of the index has been regularised.

Page 25, Bellico' changed to Bello,' "Caesar: De Bello Gallico"

Page 34, l'tude' changed to l'tude,' "Introduction  l'tude de la"

Page 43, full stop inserted after Pantheon",' ""The Gaulish Pantheon"."

Page 76, full stop inserted after VIII,' "William R. Wilde, chap.
VIII."

Page 84, double quote inserted after Luchtain,' "his name is
Luchtain.""

Page 88, double quote inserted after it,' "not be weary of it.""

Page 90, daugher' changed to daughter,' "the son of our daughter
Ethniu"

Page 90, comma changed to full stop after Dundalk,' "Boyne and Dundalk.
The heroic"

Page 94, double quote struck before Then,' "Then Nuada declared that"

Page 146, XIV' changed to XIV,' "See chap. XIV"

Page 187, double quote inserted before for,' "she said, "for I know"

Page 192, double quote inserted after King,' "race as Conchobar the
King.""

Page 192, ",' changed to ,",' ""We ourselves," replied"

Page 206, happend' changed to happened,' "who happened to be assailed"

Page 208, full stop inserted after Cweeltia,' "Pronounced Kylta or
Cweeltia."

Page 211, Mannann' changed to Manannn,' "Ilbhreach son of Manannn,
and"

Page 215, full stop inserted after Society,' "Transactions of the
Ossianic Society."

Page 238, capure' changed to capture,' "managed to capture Mac
Kineely"

Page 241, four-score' changed to fourscore,' "man of fourscore years
would"

Page 262, Lamh-fada' changed to Lamhfada,' "of the Gaelic Lugh
Lamhfada"

Page 271, full stop inserted after Vol,' "of Wales, Vol. I"

Page 292, full stop inserted after Britain,' "A bardic name for
Britain."

Page 304, double quote inserted after Pryderi,' "I see Rhiannon and
Pryderi.""

Page 316, full stop inserted after it,' "and could not get it."

Page 323, full stop inserted after p,' "Rhys: ibid., p. 169."

Page 366, full stop inserted after Brn,' "and the Beheading of Brn"."

Page 366, full stop inserted after Chap,' "Chap. XXI-"The Mythological"

Page 375, full stop changed to comma after Britonum,' "Historia
Britonum, Books IX"

Page 388, full stop inserted after MSS,' "Iolo MSS., p. 474."

Page 389, full stop inserted after MSS,' "Iolo MSS., p. 523."

Page 415, full stop inserted after St,' "were offered at St. Tegla's
Well"

Page 420, homrique' changed to Homrique,' "et celle de l'pope
Homrique"

Page 420, a' changed to ,' "Introduction  l'tude de la"

Page 421, Danaan' changed to Danann,' "The story of the Tuatha D
Danann"

Page 428, Danaan' changed to Danann,' "on the Tuatha D Danann"

Page 430, Dair' changed to Daire,' "Daire of Cualgne, owner of the
Brown Bull"

Page 431, Aeif' changed to Aeife,' ""Demon of the air", Aeife changed
into a"

Page 435, 226' changed to 326,' "Gwynhwyvar, 315, 326, 331-333, 334,
364."

Page 438, Lochlannoch' changed to Lochlannach,' "Lochlannach, the,
205, 211."

Page 442, Porsenna' changed to Porsena,' "Porsena, a Roman consul,
385."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mythology of the British Islands, by 
Charles Squire

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHOLOGY ***

***** This file should be named 54616-0.txt or 54616-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/6/1/54616/

Produced by MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Empire, by Clifford Donald Simak

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Empire

Author: Clifford Donald Simak

Release Date: February 28, 2009 [EBook #28215]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMPIRE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                 EMPIRE

 A Powerful Novel of Intrigue and Action
      in the Not-So-Distant Future

                  _by_

            CLIFFORD D. SIMAK


  _A Complete ORIGINAL Book_, UNABRIDGED


          WORLD EDITIONS, INC.
          105 WEST 40TH STREET
          NEW YORK 18, NEW YORK




   _Copyright 1951_
         _by_
  WORLD EDITIONS, INC.


 PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




Transcriber's Note:

    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.




_CHAPTER ONE_


Spencer Chambers frowned at the spacegram on the desk before him. John
Moore Mallory. That was the man who had caused so much trouble in the
Jovian elections. The troublemaker who had shouted for an investigation
of Interplanetary Power. The man who had said that Spencer Chambers and
Interplanetary Power were waging economic war against the people of the
Solar System.

Chambers smiled. With long, well-kept fingers, he rubbed his iron-gray
mustache.

John Moore Mallory was right; for that reason, he was a dangerous man.
Prison was the place for him, but probably a prison outside the Jovian
confederacy. Perhaps one of the prison ships that plied to the edge of
the System, clear to the orbit of Pluto. Or would the prison on Mercury
be better?

Spencer Chambers leaned back in his chair and matched his fingertips,
staring at them, frowning again.

Mercury was a hard place. A man's life wasn't worth much there. Working
in the power plants, where the Sun poured out its flaming blast of heat,
and radiations sucked the energy from one's body, in six months, a year
at most, any man was finished.

Chambers shook his head. Not Mercury. He had nothing against Mallory. He
had never met the man but he rather liked him. Mallory was just a man
fighting for a principle, the same as Chambers was doing.

He was sorry that it had been necessary to put Mallory in prison. If the
man only had listened to reason, had accepted the proposals that had
been made, or just had dropped out of sight until the Jovian elections
were over ... or at least had moderated his charges. But when he had
attempted to reveal the offers, which he termed bribery, something had
to be done.

Ludwig Stutsman had handled that part of it. Brilliant fellow, this
Stutsman, but as mean a human as ever walked on two legs. A man utterly
without mercy, entirely without principle. A man who would stoop to any
depth. But a useful man, a good one to have around to do the dirty work.
And dirty work sometimes was necessary.

Chambers picked up the spacegram again and studied it. Stutsman, out on
Callisto now, had sent it. He was doing a good job out there. The Jovian
confederacy, less than one Earth year under Interplanetary domination,
was still half rebellious, still angry at being forced to turn over its
government to the hand-picked officials of Chambers' company. An iron
heel was needed and Stutsman was that iron heel.

       *       *       *       *       *

So the people on the Jovian satellites wanted the release of John Moore
Mallory. "They're getting ugly," the spacegram said. It had been a
mistake to confine Mallory to Callisto. Stutsman should have thought of
that.

Chambers would instruct Stutsman to remove Mallory from the Callisto
prison, place him on one of the prison ships. Give instructions to the
captain to make things comfortable for him. When this furor had blown
over, after things had quieted down in the Jovian confederacy, it might
be possible to release Mallory. After all, the man wasn't really guilty
of any crime. It was a shame that he should be imprisoned when
racketeering rats like Scorio went scot-free right here in New York.

A buzzer purred softly and Chambers reached out to press a stud.

"Dr. Craven to see you," his secretary said. "You asked to see him, Mr.
Chambers."

"All right," said Chambers. "Send him right in."

He clicked the stud again, picked up his pen, wrote out a spacegram to
Stutsman, and signed it.

Dr. Herbert Craven stood just inside the door, his black suit wrinkled
and untidy, his sparse sandy hair standing on end.

"You sent for me," he said sourly.

"Sit down, Doctor," invited Chambers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Craven sat down. He peered at Chambers through thick-lensed glasses.

"I haven't much time," he declared acidly.

"Cigar?" Chambers offered.

"Never smoke."

"A drink, then?"

"You know I don't drink," snapped Craven.

"Doctor," said Chambers, "you're the least sociable man I've ever known.
What do you do to enjoy yourself?"

"I work," said Craven. "I find it interesting."

"You must. You even begrudge the time it takes to talk with me."

"I won't deny it. What do you want this time?"

Chambers swung about to face him squarely across the desk. There was a
cold look in the financier's gray eyes and his lips were grim.

"Craven," he said, "I don't trust you. I've never trusted you. Probably
that's no news to you."

"You don't trust anyone," countered Craven. "You're watching everybody
all the time."

"You sold me a gadget I didn't need five years ago," said Chambers. "You
outfoxed me and I don't hold it against you. In fact, it almost made me
admire you. Because of that I put you under a contract, one that you and
all the lawyers in hell can't break, because someday you'll find
something valuable, and when you do, I want it. A million a year is a
high price to pay to protect myself against you, but I think it's worth
it. If I didn't think so, I'd have turned you over to Stutsman long ago.
Stutsman knows how to handle men like you."

"You mean," said Craven, "that you've found I'm working on something I
haven't reported to you."

"That's exactly it."

"You'll get a report when I have something to report. Not before."

"That's all right," said Chambers. "I just wanted you to know."

Craven got to his feet slowly. "These talks with you are so refreshing,"
he remarked.

"We'll have to have them oftener," said Chambers.

Craven banged the door as he went out.

Chambers stared after him. A queer man, the most astute scientific mind
anywhere, but not a man to be trusted.

       *       *       *       *       *

The president of Interplanetary Power rose from his chair and walked to
the window. Below spread the roaring inferno of New York, greatest city
in the Solar System, a strange place of queer beauty and weighty
materialism, dreamlike in its super-skyscraper construction, but
utilitarian in its purpose, for it was a port of many planets.

The afternoon sunlight slanted through the window, softening the
iron-gray hair of the man who stood there. His shoulders almost blocked
the window, for he had the body of a fighting man, one, moreover, in
good condition. His short-clipped mustache rode with an air of dignity
above his thin, rugged mouth.

His eyes looked out on the city, but did not see it. Through his brain
went the vision of a dream that was coming true. His dream spun its
fragile net about the planets of the Solar System, about their moons,
about every single foot of planetary ground where men had gone to build
and create a second homeland--the mines of Mercury and the farms of
Venus, the pleasure-lands of Mars and the mighty domed cities on the
moons of Jupiter, the moons of Saturn and the great, cold laboratories
of Pluto.

Power was the key, supplied by the accumulators owned and rented by
Interplanetary Power. A monopoly of power. Power that Venus and Mercury
had too much of, must sell on the market, and that the other planets and
satellites needed. Power to drive huge spaceships across the void, to
turn the wheels of industry, to heat the domes on colder worlds. Power
to make possible the life and functioning of mankind on hostile worlds.

In the great power plants of Mercury and Venus, the accumulators were
charged and then shipped out to those other worlds where power was
needed. Accumulators were rented, never sold. Because they belonged at
all times to Interplanetary Power, they literally held the fate of all
the planets in their cells.

A few accumulators were manufactured and sold by other smaller
companies, but they were few and the price was high. Interplanetary saw
to that. When the cry of monopoly was raised, Interplanetary could point
to these other manufacturers as proof that there was no restraint of
trade. Under the statute no monopoly could be charged, but the cost of
manufacturing accumulators alone was protection against serious
competition from anyone.

Upon a satisfactory, efficient power-storage device rested the success
or failure of space travel itself. That device and the power it stored
were for sale by Interplanetary ... and, to all practical purposes, by
Interplanetary only.

Accordingly, year after year, Interplanetary had tightened its grip upon
the Solar System. Mercury was virtually owned by the company. Mars and
Venus were little more than puppet states. And now the government of the
Jovian confederacy was in the hands of men who acknowledged Spencer
Chambers as their master. On Earth the agents and the lobbyists
representing Interplanetary swarmed in every capital, even in the
capital of the Central European Federation, whose people were dominated
by an absolute dictatorship. For even Central Europe needed
accumulators.

"Economic dictatorship," said Spencer Chambers to himself. "That's what
John Moore Mallory called it." Well, why not? Such a dictatorship would
insure the best business brains at the heads of the governments, would
give the Solar System a business administration, would guard against the
mistakes of popular government.

Democracies were based on a false presumption--the theory that all
people were fit to rule. It granted intelligence where there was no
intelligence. It presumed ability where there was not the slightest
trace of any. It gave the idiot the same political standing as the wise
man, the crackpot the same political opportunity as the man of
well-grounded common sense, the weakling the same voice as the strong
man. It was government by emotion rather than by judgment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spencer Chambers' face took on stern lines. There was no softness left
now. The late afternoon sunlight painted angles and threw shadows and
created highlights that made him look almost like a granite mask on a
solid granite body.

There was no room for Mallory's nonsense in a dynamic, expanding
civilization. No reason to kill him--even he might have value under
certain circumstances, and no really efficient executive destroys
value--but he had to be out of the way where his mob-rousing tongue
could do no damage. The damned fool! What good would his idiotic
idealism do him on a prison spaceship?




_CHAPTER TWO_


Russell Page squinted thoughtful eyes at the thing he had created--a
transparent cloud, a visible, sharply outlined cloud of _something_. It
was visible as a piece of glass is visible, as a globe of water is
visible. There it lay, within his apparatus, a thing that shouldn't be.

"I believe we have something there, Harry," he said slowly.

Harry Wilson sucked at the cigarette that drooped from the corner of his
mouth, blew twin streams of smoke from his nostrils. His eyes twitched
nervously.

"Yeah," he said. "Anti-entropy."

"All of that," said Russell Page. "Perhaps a whole lot more."

"It stops all energy change," said Wilson, "as if time stood still and
things remained exactly as they were when time had stopped."

"It's more than that," Page declared. "It conserves not only energy _in
toto_, not only the energy of the whole, but the energy of the part. It
is perfectly transparent, yet it has refractive qualities. It won't
absorb light because to do so would change its energy content. In that
field, whatever is hot stays hot, whatever is cold can't gain heat."

He scraped his hand over a week's growth of beard, considering. From his
pocket he took a pipe and a leather pouch. Thoughtfully he filled the
pipe and lit it.

It had started with his experiments in Force Field 348, an experiment to
observe the effects of heating a conductor in that field. It had been
impossible to heat the conductor electrically, for that would have upset
the field, changed it, twisted it into something else. So he had used a
Bunsen burner.

Through half-closed eyes, he still could see that slender strand of
imperm wire, how its silvery length had turned to red under the blue
flame. Deep red at first and then brighter until it flamed in almost
white-hot incandescence. And all the while the humming of the
transformer as the force field built up. The humming of the transformer
and the muted roaring of the burner and the glowing heat in the length
of wire.

Something had happened then ... an awesome something. A weird wrench as
if some greater power, some greater law had taken hold. A glove of
force, invisible, but somehow sensed, had closed about the wire and
flame. Instantly the roaring of the burner changed in tone; an odor of
gas spewed out of the vents at its base. Something had cut off the flow
of flame in the brass tube. Some force, _something_ ...

The flame was a transparent cloud. The blue and red of flame and hot
wire had changed, in the whiplash of a second, to a refractive but
transparent cloud that hung there within the apparatus.

       *       *       *       *       *

The red color had vanished from the wire as the blue had vanished from
the flame. The wire was shining. It wasn't silvery; it wasn't white.
There was no hint of color, just a refractive blur that told him the
wire was there. Colorless reflection. _And that meant perfect
reflection!_ The most perfect reflectors reflect little more than 98 per
cent of the light incident and the absorption of the two per cent colors
those reflectors as copper or gold or chromium. But the imperm wire
within that force field that had been flame a moment before, was
reflecting _all_ light.

He had cut the wire with a pair of shears and it had still hung,
unsupported, in the air, unchanging within the shimmer that constituted
something no man had ever seen before.

"You can't put energy in," said Page, talking to himself, chewing the
bit of his pipe. "You can't take energy out. It's still as hot as it
was at the moment the change came. But it can't radiate any of that
heat. It can't radiate any kind of energy."

Why, even the wire was reflective, so that it couldn't absorb energy and
thus disturb the balance that existed within that bit of space. Not only
energy itself was preserved, but the very form of energy.

But why? That was the question that hammered at him. Why? Before he
could go ahead, he had to know why.

Perhaps the verging of the field toward Field 349? Somewhere in between
those two fields of force, somewhere within that almost non-existent
borderline which separated them, he might find the secret.

Rising to his feet, he knocked out his pipe.

"Harry," he announced, "we have work to do."

Smoke drooled from Wilson's nostrils.

"Yeah," he said.

Page had a sudden urge to lash out and hit the man. That eternal
drooling of smoke out of his nostrils, that everlasting cigarette
dangling limply from one corner of his mouth, the shifty eyes, the dirty
fingernails, got on his nerves.

But Wilson was a mechanical genius. His hands were clever despite the
dirty nails. They could fashion pinhead cameras and three-gram
electroscopes or balances capable of measuring the pressure of
electronic impacts. As a laboratory assistant he was unbeatable. If only
he wouldn't answer every statement or question with that nerve-racking
'yeah'!

Page stopped in front of a smaller room, enclosed by heavy quartz.
Inside that room was the great bank of mercury-vapor rectifiers. From
them lashed a blue-green glare that splashed against his face and
shoulders, painting him in angry, garish color. The glass guarded him
from the terrific blast of ultra-violet light that flared from the pool
of shimmering molten metal, a terrible emanation that would have flayed
a man's skin from his body within the space of seconds.

       *       *       *       *       *

The scientist squinted his eyes against the glare. There was something
in it that caught him with a deadly fascination. The personification of
power--the incredibly intense spot of incandescent vapor, the tiny
sphere of blue-green fire, the spinning surge of that shining pool, the
intense glare of ionization.

Power ... the breath of modern mankind, the pulse of progress.

In an adjacent room were the accumulators. Not Interplanetary
accumulators, which he would have had to rent, but ones he had bought
from a small manufacturer who turned out only ten or fifteen thousand a
year ... not enough to bother Interplanetary.

Gregory Manning had made it possible for him to buy those accumulators.
Manning had made many things possible in this little laboratory hidden
deep within the heart of the Sierras, many miles from any other
habitation.

Manning's grandfather, Jackson Manning, had first generated the
curvature field and overcome gravity, had left his grandson a fortune
that approached the five-billion mark. But that had not been all. From
his famous ancestor, Manning had inherited a keen, sharp, scientific
mind. From his mother's father, Anthony Barret, he had gained an astute
business sense. But unlike his maternal grandfather, he had not turned
his attention entirely to business. Old Man Barret had virtually ruled
Wall Street for almost a generation, had become a financial myth linked
with keen business sense, with an uncanny ability to handle men and
money. But his grandson, Gregory Manning, had become known to the world
in a different way. For while he had inherited scientific ability from
one side of the family, financial sense from the other, he likewise had
inherited from some other ancestor--perhaps remote and unknown--a
wanderlust that had taken him to the farthest outposts of the Solar
System.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Gregory Manning who had financed and headed the rescue expedition
which took the first Pluto flight off that dark icebox of a world when
the exploration ship had crashed. It was he who had piloted home the
winning ship in the Jupiter derby, sending his bulleting craft screaming
around the mighty planet in a time which set a Solar record. It was
Gregory Manning who had entered the Venusian swamps and brought back,
alive, the mystery lizard that had been reported there. And he was the
one who had flown the serum to Mercury when the lives of ten thousand
men depended upon the thrumming engines that drove the shining ship
inward toward the Sun.

Russell Page had known him since college days. They had worked out their
experiments together in the school laboratories, had spent long hours
arguing and wondering ... debating scientific theories. Both had loved
the same girl, both had lost her, and together they had been bitter over
it ... drowning their bitterness in a three-day drunk that made campus
history.

After graduation Gregory Manning had gone on to world fame, had roamed
over the face of every planet except Jupiter and Saturn, had visited
every inhabited moon, had climbed Lunar mountains, penetrated Venusian
swamps, crossed Martian deserts, driven by a need to see and experience
that would not let him rest. Russell Page had sunk into obscurity, had
buried himself in scientific research, coming more and more to aim his
effort at the discovery of a new source of power ... power that would be
cheap, that would destroy the threat of Interplanetary dictatorship.

Page turned away from the rectifier room.

"Maybe I'll have something to show Greg soon," he told himself. "Maybe,
after all these years...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Forty minutes after Page put through the call to Chicago, Gregory
Manning arrived. The scientist, watching for him from the tiny lawn that
surrounded the combined home and laboratory, saw his plane bullet into
sight, scream down toward the little field and make a perfect landing.

Hurrying toward the plane as Gregory stepped out of it, Russell noted
that his friend looked the same as ever, though it had been a year or
more since he had seen him. The thing that was discomfiting about Greg
was his apparently enduring youthfulness.

He was clad in jodhpurs and boots and an old tweed coat, with a
brilliant blue stock at his throat. He waved a hand in greeting and
hurried forward. Russ heard the grating of his boots across the gravel
of the walk.

Greg's face was bleak; it always was. A clean, smooth face, hard, with
something stern about the eyes.

His grip almost crushed Russ's hand, but his tone was crisp. "You
sounded excited, Russ."

"I have a right to be," said the scientist. "I think I have found
something at last."

"Atomic power?" asked Manning. There was no flutter of excitement in his
voice, just a little hardening of the lines about his eyes, a little
tensing of the muscles in his cheeks.

Russ shook his head. "Not atomic energy. If it's anything, it's material
energy, the secret of the energy of matter."

They halted before two lawn chairs.

"Let's sit down here," invited Russ. "I can tell it to you out here,
show it to you afterward. It isn't often I can be outdoors."

"It is a fine place," said Greg. "I can smell the pines."

The laboratory perched on a ledge of rugged rock, nearly 7,000 feet
above sea level. Before them the land swept down in jagged ruggedness
to a valley far below, where a stream flashed in the noonday sun. Beyond
climbed pine-clad slopes and far in the distance gleamed shimmering
spires of snow-capped peaks.

From his leather jacket Russ hauled forth his pipe and tobacco, lighted
up.

"It was this way," he said. Leaning back comfortably he outlined the
first experiment. Manning listened intently.

"Now comes the funny part," Russ added. "I had hopes before, but I
believe this is what put me on the right track. I took a metal rod, a
welding rod, you know. I pushed it into that solidified force field, if
that is what you'd call it ... although that doesn't describe it. The
rod went in. Took a lot of pushing, but it went in. And though the field
seemed entirely transparent, you couldn't see the rod, even after I had
pushed enough of it in so it should have come out the other side. It was
as if it hadn't entered the sphere of force at all. As if I were just
telescoping the rod and its density were increasing as I pushed, like
pushing it back into itself, but that, of course, wouldn't have been
possible."

He paused and puffed at his pipe, his eyes fixed on the snowy peaks far
in the purple distance. Manning waited.

"Finally the rod came out," Russ went on. "Mind you, it came out, even
after I would have sworn, if I had relied alone upon my eyes, that it
hadn't entered the sphere at all. _But it came out ninety degrees
removed from its point of entry!_"

"Wait a second," said Manning. "This doesn't check. Did you do it more
than once?"

"I did it a dozen times and the results were the same each time. But you
haven't heard the half of it. When I pulled that rod out--yes, I could
pull it out--it was a good two inches shorter than when I had pushed it
in. I couldn't believe that part of it. It was even harder to believe
than that the rod should come out ninety degrees from its point of
entry. I measured the rods after that and made sure. Kept an accurate
record. Every single one of them lost approximately two inches by being
shoved into the sphere. Every single one of them repeated the phenomenon
of curving within the sphere to come out somewhere else than where I had
inserted them."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Any explanation of it?" asked Manning, and now there was a cold chill
of excitement in his voice.

"Theories, no real explanations. Remember that you can't see the rod
after you push it into the sphere. It's just as if it isn't there.
Well, maybe it isn't. You can't disturb anything within that sphere or
you'd change the sum of potential-kinetic-pressure energies within it.
The sphere seems dedicated to that one thing ... it cannot change. If
the rod struck the imperm wire within the field, it would press the wire
down, would use up energy, decrease the potential energy. So the rod
simply had to miss it somehow. I believe it _moved into some higher
plane of existence and went around_. And in doing that it had to turn so
many corners, so many fourth-dimensional corners, that the length was
used up. Or maybe it was increased in density. I'm not sure. Perhaps no
one will ever know."

"Why didn't you tell me about this sooner?" demanded Manning. "I should
have been out here helping you. Maybe I wouldn't be much good, but I
might have helped."

"You'll have your chance," Russ told him. "We're just starting. I wanted
to be sure I had something before I troubled you. I tried other things
with that first sphere. I found that metal pushed through the sphere
will conduct an electrical current, which is pretty definite proof that
the metal isn't within the sphere at all. Glass can be forced through it
without breaking. Not flexible glass, but rods of plain old brittle
glass. It turns without breaking, and it also loses some of its length.
Water can be forced through a tube inserted in the sphere, but only when
terrific pressure is applied. What that proves I can't even begin to
guess."

"You said you experimented on the first sphere," said Manning. "Have you
made others?"

Russ rose from his chair.

"Come on in, Greg," he said, and there was a grin on his face. "I have
something you'll have to see to appreciate."

       *       *       *       *       *

The apparatus was heavier and larger than the first in which Russ had
created the sphere of energy. Fed by a powerful accumulator battery,
five power leads were aimed at it, centered in the space between four
great copper blocks.

Russ's hand went out to the switch that controlled the power. Suddenly
the power beams flamed, changed from a dull glow into an intense, almost
intolerable brilliance. A dull grumble of power climbed up to a steady
wail.

The beams had changed color, were bluish now, the typical color of
ionized air. They were just power beams, meeting at a common center, but
somehow they were queer, too, for though they were capable of slashing
far out into space, they were stopped dead. Their might was pouring into
a common center and going no farther. A splash of intensely glowing
light rested over them, then began to rotate slowly as a motor somewhere
hummed softly, cutting through the mad roar and rumble of power that
surged through the laboratory.

The glowing light was spinning more swiftly now. A rotating field was
being established. The power beams began to wink, falling and rising in
intensity. The sphere seemed to grow, almost filling the space between
the copper blocks. It touched one and rebounded slightly toward another.
It extended, increased slightly. A terrible screaming ripped through the
room, drowning out the titanic din as the spinning sphere came in
contact with the copper blocks, as force and metal resulted in weird
friction.

With a shocking wrench the beams went dead, the scream cut off, the roar
was gone. A terrifying silence fell upon the room as soon as the
suddenly thunking relays opened automatically.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sphere was gone! In its place was a tenuous refraction that told
where it had been. That and a thin layer of perfectly reflective
copper ... colorless now, but Manning knew it was copper, for it
represented the continuation of the great copper blocks.

His mind felt as if it were racing in neutral, getting nowhere. Within
that sphere was the total energy that had been poured out by five
gigantic beams, turned on full, for almost a minute's time. Compressed
energy! Energy enough to blast these mountains down to the primal rock
were it released instantly. Energy trapped and held by virtue of some
peculiarity of that little borderline between Force Fields 348 and 349.

Russ walked across the room to a small electric truck with rubber
caterpillar treads, driven by a bank of portable accumulators.
Skillfully the scientist maneuvered it over to the other side of the
room, picked up a steel bar four inches in diameter and five feet long.
Holding it by the handler's magnetic crane, he fixed it firmly in the
armlike jaws on the front of the machine, then moved the machine into a
position straddling the sphere of force.

With smashing momentum the iron jaws thrust downward, driving the steel
bar into the sphere. There was a groaning crash as the handler came to a
halt, shuddering, with only eight inches of the bar buried in the
sphere. The stench of hot insulation filled the room while the electric
motor throbbed, the rubber treads creaked, the machine groaned and
strained, but the bar would go no farther.

Russ shut off the machine and stood back.

"That gives you an idea," he said grimly.

"The trick now," Greg said, "is to break down the field."

Without a word, Russ reached for the power controls. A sudden roar of
thunderous fury and the beams leaped at the sphere ... but this time the
sphere did not materialize again. Again the wrench shuddered through the
laboratory, a wrench that seemed to distort space and time.

Then, as abruptly as it had come, it was gone. But when it ended,
something gigantic and incomprehensibly powerful seemed to rush
soundlessly by ... something that was felt and sensed. It was like a
great noiseless, breathless wind in the dead of night that rushed by
them and through them, all about them in space and died slowly away.

But the vanished steel did not reappear with the disappearance of the
sphere and the draining away of power. Almost grotesquely now, the
handler stood poised above the place where the sphere had been and in
its jaws it held the bar. But the end of the bar, the eight inches that
had been within the sphere, was gone. It had been sliced off so sharply
that it left a highly reflective concave mirror on the severed surface.

"Where is it?" demanded Manning. "In that higher dimension?"

Russ shook his head. "You noticed that rushing sensation? That may have
been the energy of matter rushing into some other space. It may be the
key to the energy of matter!"

Gregory Manning stared at the bar. "I'm staying with you, Russ. I'm
seeing this thing through."

"I knew you would," said Russ.

Triumph flamed briefly in Manning's eyes. "And when we finish, we'll
have something that will break Interplanetary. We'll smash their
stranglehold on the Solar System." He stopped and looked at Page. "Lord,
Russ," he whispered, "do you realize what we'll have?"

"I think I do, Greg," the scientist answered soberly. "Material energy
engines. Power so cheap that you won't be able to give it away. More
power than anybody could ever need."




_CHAPTER THREE_


Russ hunched over the keyboard set in the control room of the _Comet_
and stared down at the keys. The equation was set and ready. All he had
to do was tap that key and they would know, beyond all argument, whether
or not they had dipped into the awful heart of material energy; whether,
finally, they held in their grasp the key to the release of energy that
would give the System power to spare.

His glance lifted from the keyboard, looked out the observation port.
Through the inkiness of space ran a faint blue thread, a tiny line that
stretched from the ship and away until it was lost in the darkness of
the void.

One hundred thousand miles away, that thread touched the surface of a
steel ball bearing ... a speck in the immensity of space.

He thought about that little beam of blue. It took power to do that,
power to hold a beam tight and strong and steady through the stress of
one hundred thousand miles. But it had to be that far away ... and they
had that power. From the bowels of the ship came the deep purr of it,
the angry, silky song of mighty engines throttled down.

He heard Harry Wilson shuffling impatiently behind him, smelled the
acrid smoke that floated from the tip of Wilson's cigarette.

"Might as well punch that key, Russ," said Manning's cool voice. "We
have to find out sooner or later."

Russ's finger hovered over the key, steadied and held. When he punched
that key, if everything worked right, the energy in the tiny ball
bearing would be released instantaneously. The energy of a piece of
steel, weighing less than an ounce. Over that tight beam of blue would
flash the impulse of destruction....

His fingers plunged down.

Space flamed in front of them. For just an instant the void seemed
filled with an angry, bursting fire that lapped with hungry tongues of
cold, blue light toward the distant planets. A flare so intense that it
was visible on the Jovian worlds, three hundred million miles away. It
lighted the night-side of Earth, blotting out the stars and Moon,
sending astronomers scurrying for their telescopes, rating foot-high
streamers in the night editions.

Slowly Russ turned around and faced his friend.

"We have it, Greg," he said. "We really have it. We've tested the
control formulas all along the line. We know what we can do."

"We don't know it all yet," declared Greg. "We know we can make it work,
but I have a feeling we haven't more than skimmed the surface
possibilities."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ sank into a chair and stared about the room. They knew they could
generate alternating current of any frequency they chose by use of a
special collector apparatus. They could release radiant energy in almost
any quantity they desired, in any wave-length, from the longest radio to
the incredibly hard cosmics. The electrical power they could measure
accurately and easily by simple voltmeters and ammeters. But radiant
energy was another thing. When it passed all hitherto known bonds, it
would simply fuse any instrument they might use to measure it.

But they knew the power they generated. In one split second they had
burst the energy bonds of a tiny bit of steel and that energy had glared
briefly more hotly than the Sun.

"Greg," he said, "it isn't often you can say that any event was the
beginning of a new era. You can with this--the era of unlimited power.
It kind of scares me."

Up until a hundred years ago coal and oil and oxygen had been the main
power sources, but with the dwindling of the supply of coal and oil, man
had sought another way. He had turned back to the old dream of snatching
power direct from the Sun. In the year 2048 Patterson had perfected the
photo-cell. Then the Alexanderson accumulators made it possible to pump
the life-blood of power to the far reaches of the System, and on Mercury
and Venus, and to a lesser extent on Earth, great accumulator power
plants had sprung up, with Interplanetary, under the driving genius of
Spencer Chambers, gaining control of the market.

The photo-cell and the accumulator had spurred interplanetary trade and
settlement. Until it had been possible to store Sun-power for the
driving of spaceships and for shipment to the outer planets, ships had
been driven by rocket fuel, and the struggling colonies on the outer
worlds had fought a bitter battle without the aid of ready power.

Coal and oil there were in plenty on the outer worlds, but one other
essential was lacking ... oxygen. Coal on Mars, for instance, had to
burned under synthetic air pressures, like the old carburetor. The
result was inefficiency. A lot of coal burned, not enough power
delivered.

Even the photo-cells were inefficient when attempts were made to operate
them beyond the Earth; that was the maximum distance for maximum Solar
efficiency.

Russ dug into the pocket of his faded, scuffed leather jacket and hauled
forth pipe and pouch. Thoughtfully he tamped the tobacco into the bowl.

"Three months," he said. "Three months of damn hard work."

"Yeah," agreed Wilson, "we sure have worked."

Wilson's face was haggard, his eyes red. He blew smoke through his
nostrils.

"When we get back, how about us taking a little vacation?" he asked.

Russ laughed. "You can if you want to. Greg and I are keeping on."

"We can't waste time," Manning said. "Spencer Chambers may get wind of
this. He'd move all hell to stop us."

Wilson spat out his cigarette. "Why don't you patent what you have? That
would protect you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ grinned, but it was a sour one.

"No use," said Greg. "Chambers would tie us up in a mile of legal red
tape. It would be just like walking up and handing it to him."

"You guys go ahead and work," Wilson stated. "I'm taking a vacation.
Three months is too damn long to stay out in a spaceship."

"It doesn't seem long to me," said Greg, his tone cold and sharp.

No, thought Russ, it hadn't seemed long. Perhaps the hours had been
rough, the work hard, but he hadn't noticed. Sleep and food had come in
snatches. For three months they had worked in space, not daring to carry
out their experiments on Earth ... frankly afraid of the thing they had.

He glanced at Manning.

The three months had left no mark upon him, no hint of fatigue or
strain. Russ understood now how Manning had done the things he did. The
man was all steel and flame. Nothing could touch him.

"We still have a lot to do," said Manning.

Russ leaned back and puffed at his pipe.

Yes, there was a lot to do. Transmission problems, for instance. To
conduct away such terrific power as they knew they were capable of
developing would require copper or silver bars as thick as a man's
thigh, and even so at voltages capable of jumping a two-foot spark gap.

Obviously, a small machine such as they now had would be impractical. No
matter how perfectly it might be insulated, the atmosphere itself would
not be an insulator, with power such as this. And if one tried to
deliver the energy as a mechanical rotation of a shaft, what shaft could
transmit it safely and under control?

"Oh, hell," Russ burst out, "let's get back to Earth."

       *       *       *       *       *

Harry Wilson watched the couple alight from the aero-taxi, walk up the
broad steps and pass through the magic portals of the Martian Club. He
could imagine what the club was like, the deference of the management,
the exotic atmosphere of the dining room, the excellence of the long,
cold drinks served at the bar. Mysterious drinks concocted of
ingredients harvested in the jungles of Venus, spiced with produce from
the irrigated gardens of Mars.

He puffed on the dangling cigarette and shuffled on along the airy
highwalk. Below and above him, all around him flowed the beauty and the
glamor, the bravery and the splendor of New York. The city's song was in
his ears, the surging noises that were its voice.

Two thousand feet above his head reared giant pinnacles of shining
metal, glinting in the noonday sun, architecture that bore the alien
stamp of other worlds.

Wilson turned around, stared at the Martian Club. A man needed money to
pass through those doors, to taste the drinks that slid across its bar,
to sit and watch its floor shows, to hear the music of its orchestras.

For a moment he stood, hesitating, as if he were trying to make up his
mind. He flipped away the cigarette, turned on his heel, walked briskly
to the automatic elevator which would take him to the lower levels.

There, on the third level, he entered a Mecho restaurant, sat down at a
table and ordered from the robot waiter, pushing ivory-tipped buttons on
the menu before him.

He ate leisurely, smoked ferociously, thinking. Looking at his watch, he
saw that it was nearly two o'clock. He walked to the cashier machine,
inserted the metallic check with the correct change and received from
the clicking, chuckling register the disk that would let him out the
door.

"Thank you, come again," the cashier-robot fluted.

"Don't mention it," growled Wilson.

Outside the restaurant he walked briskly. Ten blocks away he came to a
building roofing four square blocks. Over the massive doorway, set into
the beryllium steel, was a map of the Solar System, a map that served as
a cosmic clock, tracing the movement of the planets as they swung in
their long arcs around the Sun. The Solar System was straddled by
glowing, golden letters. They read: INTERPLANETARY BUILDING.

It was from here that Spencer Chambers ruled his empire built on power.

Wilson went inside.




_CHAPTER FOUR_


The new apparatus was set up, a machine that almost filled the
laboratory ... a giant, compact mass of heavy, solidly built metal work,
tied together by beams of girderlike construction. It was meant to stand
up under the hammering of unimaginable power, the stress of unknown
spatial factors.

Slowly, carefully, Russell Page tapped keys on the control board,
setting up an equation. Sucking thoughtfully at his pipe, he checked and
rechecked them.

Harry Wilson regarded him through squinted eyes.

"What the hell is going to happen now?" he asked.

"We'll have to wait and see," Russ answered. "We know what we want to
happen, what we hope will happen, but we never can be sure. We are
working with conditions that are entirely new."

Sitting beside a table littered with papers, staring at the gigantic
machine before him, Gregory Manning said slowly: "That thing simply has
to adapt itself to spaceship drive. There's everything there that's
needed for space propulsion. Unlimited power from a minimum of fuel.
Split-second efficiency. Entire independence of any set condition,
because the stuff creates its own conditions."

He slowly wagged his head.

"The secret is some place along the line," he declared. "I feel that we
must be getting close to it."

Russ walked from the control board to the table, picked up a sheaf of
papers and leafed through them. He selected a handful and shook them in
his fist.

"I thought I had it here," he said. "My math must have been wrong, some
factor that I didn't include in the equation."

"You'll keep finding factors for some time yet," Greg prophesied.

"Repulsion would have been the answer," said Russ bitterly. "And the
Lord knows we have it. Plenty of it."

"Too much," observed Wilson, smoke drooling from his nostrils.

"Not too much," corrected Greg. "Inefficient control. You jump at
conclusions, Wilson."

"The math didn't show that progressive action," said Russ. "It showed
repulsion, negative gravity that could be built up until it would shoot
the ship outside the Solar System within an hour's time. Faster than
light. We don't know how many times faster."

"Forget it," advised Greg. "The way it stands, it's useless. You get
repulsion by progressive steps. A series of squares with one constant
factor. It wouldn't be any good for space travel. Imagine trying to use
it on a spaceship. You'd start with a terrific jolt. The acceleration
would fade and just when you were recovering from the first jolt, you'd
get a second one and that second one would iron you out. A spaceship
couldn't take it, let alone a human body."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Maybe this will do it," said Wilson hopefully.

"Maybe," agreed Russ. "Anyhow we'll try it. Equation 578."

"It might do the trick," said Greg. "It's a new approach to the gravity
angle. The equation explains the shifting of gravitational lines, the
changing and contortion of their direction. Twist gravity and you have a
perfect space drive. As good as negative gravity. Better, perhaps, more
easily controlled. Would make for more delicate, precise handling."

Russ laid down the sheaf of papers, lit his pipe and walked to the
apparatus.

"Here goes," he said.

His hand went out to the power lever, eased it in. With a roar the
material energy engine built within the apparatus surged into action,
sending a flow of power through the massive leads. The thunder mounted
in the room. The laboratory seemed to shudder with the impact.

Wilson, watching intently, cried out, a brief, choked-off cry. A wave of
dizziness engulfed him. The walls seemed to be falling in. The room and
the machine were blurring. Russ, at the controls, seemed horribly
disjointed. Manning was a caricature of a man, a weird, strange figure
that moved and gestured in the mad room.

Wilson fought against the dizziness. He tried to take a step and the
floor seemed to leap up and meet his outstretched foot, throwing him off
balance. His cigarette fell out of his mouth, rolled along the floor.

Russ was shouting something, but the words were distorted, loud one
instant, rising over the din of the apparatus, a mere whisper the next.
They made no sense.

There was a peculiar whistling in the air, a sound such as he had never
heard before. It seemed to come from far away, a high, thin shriek that
was torture in one's ears.

Giddy, seized with deathly nausea, Wilson clawed his way across the
floor, swung open the laboratory door and stumbled outdoors. He weaved
across the lawn and clung to a sun dial, panting.

He looked back at the laboratory and gasped in disbelief. All the trees
were bent toward the building, as if held by some mighty wind. Their
branches straining, every single leaf standing at rigid attention, the
trees were bending in toward the structure. _But there was no wind._

And then he noticed something else. No matter where the trees stood, no
matter in what direction from the laboratory, they all bent inward
toward the building ... and the whining, thundering, shrieking machine.

Inside the laboratory an empty bottle crashed off a table and smashed
into a thousand fragments. The tinkling of the broken glass was a
silvery, momentary sound that protested against the blasting thrum of
power that shook the walls.

Manning fought along the floor to Russ's side. Russ roared in his ear:
"Gravitational control! Concentration of gravitational lines!"

The papers on the desk started to slide, slithering onto the floor,
danced a crazy dervish across the room. Liquids in the laboratory
bottles were climbing the sides of glass, instead of lying at rest
parallel with the floor. A chair skated, bucking and tipping crazily,
toward the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ jerked the power lever back to zero. The power hum died. The
liquids slid back to their natural level, the chair tipped over and lay
still, papers fluttered gently downward.

The two men looked at one another across the few feet of floor space
between them. Russ wiped beads of perspiration from his forehead with
his shirt sleeve. He sucked on his pipe, but it was dead.

"Greg," Russ said jubilantly, "we have something better than
anti-gravity! We have something you might call _positive_ gravity ...
gravity that we can control. Your grandfather nullified gravity. We've
gone him one better."

Greg gestured toward the machine. "You created an attraction center.
What else?"

"But the center itself is not actually an attracting force. The fourth
dimension is mixed up in this. We have a sort of fourth-dimensional lens
that concentrates the lines of any gravitational force. Concentration in
the fourth dimension turns the force loose in three dimensions, but we
can take care of that by using mirrors of our anti-entropy. We can
arrange it so that it turns the force loose in only one dimension."

Greg was thoughtful for a moment. "We can guide a ship by a series of
lenses," he declared at last. "But here's the really important thing.
That field concentrates the forces of gravity already present. Those
forces exist throughout all of space. There are gravitational lines
everywhere. We can concentrate them in any direction we want to. In
reality, we fall toward the body which originally caused the force of
gravitation, not to the concentration."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ nodded. "That means we can create a field immediately ahead of the
ship. The ship would fall into it constantly, with the concentration
moving on ahead. The field would tend to break down in proportion to the
strain imposed and a big ship, especially when you are building up
speed, would tend to enlarge it, open it up. But the field could be kept
tight by supplying energy and we have plenty of that ... far more than
we'd ever need. We supply the energy, but that's only a small part of
it. The body emitting the gravitational force supplies the fulcrum that
moves us along."

"It would operate beyond the planets," said Greg. "It would operate
equally well anywhere in space, for all of space is filled with
gravitational stress. We could use gravitational bodies many light years
away as the driver of our ships."

A half-wild light glowed momentarily in his eyes.

"Russ," he said, "we're going to put space fields to work at last."

He walked to the chair, picked it up and sat down in it.

"We'll start building a ship," he stated, "just as soon as we know the
mechanics of this gravity concentration and control. Russ, we'll build
the greatest ship, the fastest ship, the most powerful ship the Solar
System has ever known!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Damn," said Russ, "that thing's slipped again."

He glared at the offending nut. "I'll put a lock washer on it this
time."

Wilson stepped toward the control board. From his perch on the
apparatus, Russ motioned him away.

"Never mind discharging the field," he said. "I can get around it
somehow."

Wilson squinted at him. "This tooth is near killing me."

"Still got a toothache?" asked Russ.

"Never got a wink of sleep last night."

"You better run down to Frisco and have it yanked out," suggested the
scientist. "Can't have you laid up."

"Yeah, that's right," agreed Wilson. "Maybe I will. We got a lot to do."

Russ reached out and clamped his wrench on the nut, quickly backed it
off and slipped on the washer. Viciously he tightened it home. The
wrench stuck.

Gritting his teeth on the bit of his pipe, Russ cursed soundlessly. He
yanked savagely at the wrench. It slipped from his hand, hung for a
minute on the nut and then plunged downward, falling straight into the
heart of the new force field they had developed.

Russ froze and watched, his heart in his throat, mad thoughts in his
brain. In a flash, as the wrench fell, he remembered that they knew
nothing about this field. All they knew was that any matter introduced
in it suddenly acquired an acceleration in the dimension known as time,
with its normal constant of duration reduced to zero.

When that wrench struck the field, it would cease to exist! But
something else might happen, too, something entirely unguessable.

The wrench fell only a few feet, but it seemed to take long seconds as
Russ watched, frozen in fascination.

He saw it strike the hazy glow that defined the limits of the field, saw
it floating down, as if its speed had been slowed by some dense medium.

In the instant that hazy glow intensified a thousand times--became a
blinding sun-burst! Russ ducked his head, shielded his eyes from the
terrible blast of light. A rending, shuddering thud seemed to echo ...
in space rather than in air ... and both field and wrench were gone!

A moment passed, then another, and there was the heavy, solid clanging
thud of something striking metal. This time the thud was not in space,
but a commonplace noise, as if someone had dropped a tool on the floor
above.

Russ turned around and stared at Wilson. Wilson stared back, his mouth
hanging open, the smoldering, cigarette dangling from his mouth.

"Greg!" Russ shouted, his cry shattering the silence in the laboratory.

A door burst open and Manning stepped into the main laboratory room, a
calculation pad in one hand, a pencil in the other.

"What's the matter?" he demanded.

"We have to find my wrench!"

"Your wrench?" Greg was puzzled. "Can't you get another?"

"I dropped it into the field. Its time-dimension was reduced to zero. It
became an 'instantaneous wrench'."

"Nothing new in that," said Greg, unruffled.

"But there is," persisted Russ. "The field collapsed, you see. Maybe the
wrench was too big for it to handle. And when the field collapsed the
wrench gained a new time-dimension. I heard it. We have to find it."

The three of them pounded up the stairs to the room where Russ had heard
the thump. There was nothing on the floor. They searched the room from
end to end, then the other rooms. There was no wrench.

At the end of an hour Greg went back to the main laboratory, brought
back a portable fluoroscope.

"Maybe this will do the trick," he announced bleakly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It did. They found the wrench _inside the space between the walls_!

Russ stared at the shadow in the fluoroscope plate. Undeniably it was
the shadow of the wrench.

"Fourth dimension," he said. "Transported in time."

The muscles in Greg's cheeks were tensed, that old flame of excitement
burning in his eyes, but otherwise his face was the mask of old, the
calm, almost terrible mask that had faced a thousand dangers.

"Power and time," he corrected.

"If we can control it," said Russ.

"Don't worry. We can control it. And when we can, it's the biggest thing
we've got."

Wilson licked his lips, dredged a cigarette out of a pocket.

"If you don't mind," he said, "I'll hit for Frisco tonight. This tooth
of mine is getting worse."

"Sure, can't keep an aching tooth," agreed Russ, thinking of the wrench
while talking.

"Can I take your ship?" asked Wilson.

"Sure," said Russ.

Back in the laboratory they rebuilt the field, dropped little ball
bearings in it. The ball bearings disappeared. They found them
everywhere--in the walls, in tables, in the floor. Some, still existing
in their new time-dimension, hung in mid-air, invisible, intangible, but
there.

Hours followed hours, with the sheet of data growing. Math machines
whirred and chuckled and clicked. Wilson departed for San Francisco with
his aching tooth. The other two worked on. By dawn they knew what they
were doing. Out of the chaos of happenstance they were finding rules of
order, certain formulas of behavior, equations of force.

The next day they tried heavier, more complicated things and learned
still more.

A radiogram, phoned from the nearest spaceport, forty miles distant,
informed them that Wilson would not be back for a few days. His tooth
was worse than he had thought, required an operation and treatment of
the jaw.

"Hell," said Russ, "just when he could be so much help."

With Wilson gone the two of them tackled the controlling device, labored
and swore over it. But finally it was completed.

Slumped in chairs, utterly exhausted, they looked proudly at it.

"With that," said Russ, "we can take an object and transport it any
place we want. Not only that, we can pick up any object from an
indefinite distance and bring it to us."

"What a thing for a lazy burglar," Greg observed sourly.

Worn out, they gulped sandwiches and scalding coffee, tumbled into bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The outdoor camp meeting was in full swing. The evangelist was in his
top form. The sinners' bench was crowded. Then suddenly, as the
evangelist paused for a moment's silence before he drove home an
important point, the music came. Music from the air. Music from
somewhere in the sky. The soft, heavenly music of a hymn. As if an
angels' chorus were singing in the blue.

The evangelist froze, one arm pointing upward, with index finger ready
to sweep down and emphasize his point. The sinners kneeling at the bench
were petrified. The congregation was astounded.

The hymn rolled on, punctuated, backgrounded by deep celestial organ
notes. The clear voice of the choir swept high to a bell-like note.

"Behold!" shrieked the evangelist. "Behold, a miracle! Angels singing
for us! Kneel! Kneel and pray!"

Nobody stood.

       *       *       *       *       *

Andy McIntyre was drunk again. In the piteous glare of mid-morning, he
staggered homeward from the poker party in the back of Steve Abram's
harness shop. The light revealed him to the scorn of the entire village.

At the corner of Elm and Third he ran into a maple tree. Uncertainly he
backed away, intent on making another try. Suddenly the tree spoke to
him:

"Alcohol is the scourge of mankind. It turns men into beasts. It robs
them of their brains, it shortens their lives ..."

Andy stared, unable to believe what he heard. The tree, he had no doubt,
was talking to him personally.

The voice of the tree went on: "... takes the bread out of the mouths of
women and children. Fosters crime. Weakens the moral fiber of the
nation."

"Stop!" screamed Andy. "Stop, I tell you!"

The tree stopped talking. All he could hear was the whisper of wind
among its autumn-tinted leaves.

Suddenly running, Andy darted around the corner, headed home.

"Begad," he told himself, "when trees start talkin' to you it's time to
lay off the bottle!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In another town fifty miles distant from the one in which the tree had
talked to Andy McIntyre, another miracle happened that same Sunday
morning.

Dozens of people heard the bronze statue of the soldier in the courtyard
speak. The statue did not come to life. It stood as ever, a solid piece
of golden bronze, in spots turned black and green by weather. But from
its lips came words ... words that burned themselves into the souls of
those who heard. Words that exhorted them to defend the principles for
which many men had died, to grasp and hold high the torch of democracy
and liberty.

In somber bitterness, the statue called Spencer Chambers the greatest
threat to that liberty and freedom. For, the statue said, Spencer
Chambers and Interplanetary Power were waging an economic war, a
bloodless one, but just as truly war as if there were cannons firing and
bombs exploding.

For a full five minutes the statue spoke and the crowd, growing by the
minute, stood dumbfounded.

Then silence fell over the courtyard. The statue stood as before,
unmoving, its timeless eyes staring out from under the ugly helmet, its
hands gripping the bayoneted rifle. A blue and white pigeon fluttered
softly down, alighted on the bayonet, looked the crowd over and then
flew to the courthouse tower.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in the laboratory, Russ looked at Greg.

"That radio trick gives me an idea," he said. "If we can put a radio in
statues and trees without interfering with its operation, why can't we
do the same thing with a television set?"

Greg started. "Think of the possibilities of that!" he burst out.

Within an hour a complete television sending apparatus was placed within
the field and a receptor screen set up in the laboratory.

The two moved chairs in front of the screen and sat down. Russ reached
out and pulled the switch of the field control. The screen came to life,
but it was only a gray blur.

"It's traveling too fast," said Greg. "Slow it down."

Russ retarded the lever. "When that thing's on full, it's almost
instantaneous. It travels in a time dimension and any speed slower than
instantaneity is a modification of that force field."

On the screen swam a panorama of the mountains, mile after mile of
snow-capped peaks and valleys ablaze with the flames of autumn foliage.
The mountains faded away. There was desert now and then a city. Russ
dropped the televisor set lower, down into a street. For half an hour
they sat comfortably in their chairs and watched men and women walking,
witnessed one dog fight, cruised slowly up and down, looking into
windows of homes, window-shopping in the business section.

"There's just one thing wrong," said Greg. "We can see everything, but
we can't hear a sound."

"We can fix that," Russ told him.

He lifted the televisor set from the streets, brought it back across the
desert and mountains into the laboratory.

"We have two practical applications now," said Greg. "Space drive and
television spying. I don't know which is the best. Do you realize that
with this television trick there isn't a thing that can be hidden from
us?"

"I believe we can go to Mars or Mercury or anywhere we want to with this
thing. It doesn't seem to have any particular limits. It handles
perfectly. You can move it a fraction of an inch as easily as a hundred
miles. And it's fast. Almost instantaneous. Not quite, for even with
our acceleration within time, there is a slight lag."

By evening they had an audio apparatus incorporated in the set, had
wired the screen for sound.

"Let's put this to practical use," suggested Greg. "There's a show at
the New Mercury Theater in New York I've been wanting to see. Let's
knock off work and take in that show."

"Now," said Russ, "you really have an idea. The ticket scalpers are
charging a fortune, and it won't cost us a cent to get in!"




_CHAPTER FIVE_


Pine roots burned brightly in the fireplace, snapping and sizzling as
the blaze caught and flamed on the resin. Deep in an easy chair, Greg
Manning stretched his long legs out toward the fire and lifted his
glass, squinting at the flames through the amber drink.

"There's something that's been worrying me a little," he said. "I hadn't
told you about it because I figured it wasn't as serious as it looked.
Maybe it isn't, but it looks funny."

"What's that?" asked Russ.

"The stock market," replied Greg. "There's something devilish funny
going on there. I've lost about a billion dollars in the last two
weeks."

"A _billion_ dollars?" gasped Russ.

Greg swirled the whiskey in his glass. "Don't sound so horrified. The
loss is all on paper. My stocks have gone down. Most of them cut in
half. Some even less than that. Martian Irrigation is down to 75. I paid
185 for it. It's worth 200."

"You mean something has happened to the market?"

"Not to the market. If that was it, I wouldn't worry. I've seen the
market go up and down. That's nothing to worry about. But the market,
except for a slight depression, has behaved normally in these past two
weeks. It almost looks as if somebody was out to get me."

"Who'd want to and why?"

Greg sighed. "I wish I knew. I haven't really lost a cent, of course. My
shares can't stay down for very long. The thing is that right now I
can't sell them even for what I paid for them. If I sold now I'd lose
that billion. But as long as I don't have to sell, the loss is merely on
paper."

He sipped at the drink and stared into the fire.

"If you don't have to, what are you worrying about?" asked Russ.

"Couple of things. I put that stock up as collateral to get the cash to
build the spaceship. At present prices, it will take more securities
than I thought. If the prices continue to go down, I'll have the bulk of
my holdings tied up in the spaceship. I might even be forced to
liquidate some of it and that would mean an actual loss."

He hunched forward in the chair, stared at Russ.

"Another thing," he said grimly, "is that I hate the idea of somebody
singling me out as a target. As if they were going to make a financial
example of me."

"And it sounds as if someone has," agreed Russ.

Greg leaned back again, drained his glass and set it down.

"It certainly does," he said.

Outside, seen through the window beside the fireplace, the harvest moon
was a shield of silver hung in the velvet of the sky. A lonesome wind
moaned in the pines and under the eaves.

"I got a report from Belgium the other day," said Greg. "The spaceship
is coming along. It'll be the biggest thing afloat in space."

"The biggest and the toughest," said Russ, and Greg nodded silent
agreement.

The ship itself was being manufactured at the great Space Works in
Belgium, but other parts of it, apparatus, engines, gadgets of every
description, were being manufactured at other widely scattered points.
Anyone wondering what kind of ship the finished product would be would
have a hard time gathering the correct information, which, of course,
was the idea. The "anyone" they were guarding against was Spencer
Chambers.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We need a better television set," said Russ. "This one we have is all
right, but we need the best there is. I wonder if Wilson could get us
one in Frisco and bring it back."

"I don't see why not," said Greg. "Send him a radio."

Russ stepped to the phone, called the spaceport and filed the message.

"He always stays at the Greater Martian," he told Greg. "We'll probably
catch him there."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later the phone rang. It was the spaceport.

"That message you sent to Wilson," said the voice of the operator,
"can't be delivered. Wilson isn't at the Greater Martian. The clerk said
he checked out for New York last night."

"Didn't he leave a forwarding address?" asked Russ.

"Apparently not."

Russ hung up the receiver, frowning. "Wilson is in New York."

Greg looked up from a sheet of calculations.

"New York, eh?" he said and then went back to work, but a moment later
he straightened from his work. "What would Wilson be doing in New York?"

"I wonder ..." Russ stopped and shook his head.

"Exactly," said Greg. He glanced out of the window, considering, the
muscles in his cheeks knotting. "Russ, we both are thinking the same
thing."

"I hate to think it," said Russ evenly. "I hate to think such a thing
about a man."

"One way to find out," declared Greg. He rose from the chair and walked
to the television control board, snapped the switch. Russ took a chair
beside him. On the screen the mountains danced weirdly as the set
rocketed swiftly away and then came the glint of red and yellow desert.
Blackness blanked out the screen as the set plunged into the ground,
passing through the curvature of the Earth's surface. The blackness
passed and fields and farms were beneath them on the screen, a green and
brown checkerboard with tiny white lines that were roads.

New York was in the screen now. Greg's hand moved the control and the
city rushed up at them, the spires speeding toward them like plunging
spears. Down into the canyons plunged the set, down into the financial
district with its beetling buildings that hemmed in the roaring traffic.

Grimly, surely, Greg drove his strange machine through New York. Through
buildings, through shimmering planes, through men. Like an arrow the
television set sped to its mark and then Greg's hand snapped back the
lever and in the screen was a building that covered four whole blocks.
Above the entrance was the famous Solar System map and straddling the
map were the gleaming golden letters: INTERPLANETARY BUILDING.

"Now we'll see," said Greg.

He heard the whistle of the breath in Russ's nostrils as the television
set began to move, saw the tight grip Russ had upon the chair arms.

The interior of the building showed on the screen as he drove the set
through steel and stone, offices and corridors and brief glimpses of
steel partitions, until it came to a door marked: SPENCER CHAMBERS,
PRESIDENT.

Greg's hand twisted the control slightly and the set went through the
door, into the office of Spencer Chambers.

Four men were in the room--Chambers himself; Craven, the scientist;
Arnold Grant, head of Interplanetary's publicity department, _and Harry
Wilson_!

Wilson's voice came out of the screen, a frantic, almost terrified
voice.

"I've told you all I know. I'm not a scientist. I'm a mechanic. I've
told you what they're doing. I can't tell you how they do it."

Arnold Grant leaned forward in his chair. His face was twisted in fury.

"There were plans, weren't there?" he demanded. "There were equations
and formulas. Why didn't you bring us some of them?"

Spencer Chambers raised a hand from the desk, waved it toward Grant.
"The man has told us all he knows. Obviously, he can't be any more help
to us."

"You told him to go back and see if he couldn't find something else,
didn't you?" asked Grant.

"Yes, I did," Chambers told him. "But apparently he couldn't find it."

"I tried," pleaded Wilson. Perspiration stood out on his forehead. The
cigarette in his mouth was limp and dead. "One of them was always there.
I never could get hold of any papers. I asked questions, but they were
too busy to answer. And I couldn't ask too much, because then they would
have suspected me."

"No, you couldn't do that," commented Craven with an open sneer.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the laboratory Russ pounded the arm of his chair with a clenched
fist. "The rat sold us out!"

Greg said nothing, but his face was stony and his eyes were
crystal-hard.

On the screen Chambers was speaking to Wilson. "Do you think you could
find something out if you went back again?"

Wilson squirmed in his chair.

"I'd rather not." His voice sounded like a whimper. "I'm afraid they
suspect me now. I'm afraid of what they'd do if they found out."

"That's his conscience," breathed Russ in the laboratory. "I never
suspected him."

"He's right about one thing, though," Greg said. "He'd better not come
back."

Chambers was talking again: "You realize, of course, that you haven't
been much help to us. You have only warned us that another kind of power
generation is being developed. You've set us on our guard, but other
than that we're no better off than we were before."

Wilson bristled, like a cowardly animal backed into a corner. "I told
you what was going on. You can be ready for it now. I can't help it if I
couldn't find out how all them things worked."

"Look here," said Chambers. "I made a bargain with you and I keep my
bargains. I told you I would pay you twenty thousand dollars for the
information you gave me when you first came to see me. I told you I'd
pay you for any further additional information you might give. Also I
promised you a job with the company."

Watching the financier, Wilson licked his lips. "That's right," he said.

Chambers reached out and pulled a checkbook toward him, lifted a pen
from its holder. "I'm paying you the twenty thousand for the warning.
I'm not paying you a dime more, because you gave me no other
information."

Wilson leaped to his feet, started to protest.

"Sit down," said Chambers coldly.

"But the job! You said you'd give me a job!"

Chambers shook his head. "I wouldn't have a man like you in my
organization. If you were a traitor to one man, you would be to
another."

"But ... but ..." Wilson started to object and then sat down, his face
twisted in something that came very close to fear.

Chambers ripped the check out of the book, waved it slowly in the air to
dry it. Then he arose and held it out to Wilson, who reached out a
trembling hand and took it.

"And now," said Chambers, "good day, Mr. Wilson."

For a moment Wilson stood uncertain, as if he intended to speak, but
finally he turned, without a word, and walked through the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the laboratory Russ and Greg looked at one another.

"Twenty thousand," said Greg. "Why, that was worth millions."

"It was worth everything Chambers had," said Russ, "because it's the
thing that's going to wreck him."

Their attention snapped back to the screen.

Chambers was hunched over his desk, addressing the other two.

"Now, gentlemen," he asked, "what are we to do?"

Craven shrugged his shoulders. There was a puzzled frown in the eyes
back of the thick-lensed glasses. "We haven't much to go on. Wilson
doesn't know a thing about it. He hasn't the brain to grasp even the
most fundamental ideas back of the whole thing."

Chambers nodded. "The man knew the mechanical setup perfectly, but that
was all."

"I've constructed the apparatus," said Craven. "It's astoundingly
simple. Almost too simple to do the things Wilson said it would do. He
drew plans for it, so clear that it was easy to duplicate the apparatus.
He himself checked the machine and says it is the same as Page and
Manning have. But there are thousands of possible combinations for
hookups and control board settings. Too many to try to go through and
hit upon the right answer. Because, you see, one slight adjustment in
any one of a hundred adjustments might do the trick ... but which of
those adjustments do you have to make? We have to have the formulas, the
equations, before we can even move."

"He seemed to remember a few things," said Grant hopefully. "Certain
rules and formulas."

Craven flipped both his hands angrily. "Worse than nothing," he
exploded. "What Page and Manning have done is so far in advance of
anything that anyone else has even thought about that we are completely
at sea. They're working with space fields, apparently, and we haven't
even scratched the surface in that branch of investigation. We simply
haven't got a thing to go on."

       *       *       *       *       *

"No chance at all?" asked Chambers.

Craven shook his head slowly.

"At least you could try," snapped Grant.

"Now, wait," Chambers snapped back. "You seem to forget Dr. Craven is
one of the best scientists in the world today. I'm relying on him."

Craven smiled. "I can't do anything with what Page and Manning have, but
I might try something of my own."

"By all means do so," urged Chambers. He turned to Grant. "I observed
you have carried out the plans we laid. Martian Irrigation hit a new low
today."

Grant grinned. "It was easy. Just a hint here and there to the right
people."

Chambers looked down at his hands, slowly closing into fists. "We have
to stop them some way, any way at all. Keep up the rumors. We'll make
it impossible for Greg Manning to finance this new invention. We'll take
away every last dollar he has."

He glared at the publicity man. "You understand?"

"Yes, sir," said Grant, "I understand perfectly."

"All right," said Chambers. "And your job, Craven, is to either develop
what Page has found or find something we can use in competition."

Craven growled angrily. "What happens if your damn rumors can't ruin
Manning? What if I can't find anything?"

"In that case," said Chambers, "there are other ways."

"Other ways?"

Chambers suddenly smiled at them. "I have a notion to call Stutsman back
to Earth."

Craven drummed his fingers idly on the arm of his chair. "Yes, I guess
you do have other ways," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Greg's hand snapped the switch and the screen suddenly was blank as the
televisor set returned instantly to the laboratory.

"That explains a lot of things," he said. "Among them what has happened
to my stocks."

Russ sat in his chair, numbed. "That little weak-kneed, ratting traitor,
Wilson. He'd sell his mother for a new ten-dollar bill."

"We know," said Greg, "and Chambers doesn't know we know. We'll follow
every move he makes. We'll know every one of his plans."

Pacing up and down the room, he was already planning their campaign.

"There are still a few things to do," he added. "A few possibilities we
may have overlooked."

"But will we have time?" asked Russ.

"I think so. Chambers is going to go slow. The gamble is too big to risk
any slip. He doesn't want to get in bad with the law. There won't be any
strong-arm stuff ... not until he recalls Stutsman from Callisto."

He paused in mid-stride, stood planted solidly on the floor.

"When Stutsman gets into the game," he said, "all hell will break
loose."

He took a deep breath.

"But we'll be ready for it then!"




_CHAPTER SIX_


"If we can get television reception with this apparatus of ours," asked
Greg, "what is to prevent us from televising? Why can't we send as well
as receive?"

Russ drew doodles on a calculation sheet. "We could. Just something else
to work out. You must remember we're working in a four-dimensional
medium. That would complicate matters a little. Not like working in
three dimensions alone. It would ..."

He stopped. The pencil fell from his finger and he swung around slowly
to face Manning.

"What's the matter now?" asked Greg.

"Look," said Russ excitedly. "We're working in four dimensions. And if
we televised through four dimensions, what would we get?"

Greg wrinkled his brow. Suddenly his face relaxed. "You don't mean we
can televise in _three_ dimensions, do you?"

"That's what it should work out to," declared Russ. He swung back to the
table again, picked up his pencil and jotted down equations. He looked
up from the sheet. "Three-dimensional television!" he almost whispered.

"Something new again," commented Greg.

"I'll say it's new!"

Russ reached out and jerked a calculator toward him. Rapidly he set up
the equations, pressed the tabulator lever. The machine gurgled and
chuckled, clicked out the result. Bending over to read it, Russ sucked
in his breath.

"It's working out right," he said.

"That'll mean new equipment, lots of it," Greg pointed out. "Wilson's
gone, damn him. Who's going to help us?"

"We'll do it ourselves," said Russ. "When we're the only ones here, we
can be sure there won't be any leak."

It took hours of work on the math machines, but at the end of that time
Russ was certain of his ground.

"Now we go to work," he said, gleefully.

In a week's time they had built a triple televisor, but simplifications
of the standard commercial set gave them a mechanism that weighed little
more and was far more efficient and accurate.

During the time the work went on they maintained a watch over both the
office of Spencer Chambers and the laboratory in which Dr. Herbert
Craven worked 16 hours a day. Unseen, unsuspected, they were silent
companions of the two men during many hours. They read what the men
wrote, read what was written to them, heard what they said, saw how they
acted. Doing so, the pair in the high mountain laboratory gained a deep
insight into the characters of unsuspecting quarries.

"Both utterly ruthless," declared Greg. "But apparently men who are
sincere in thinking that the spoils belong to the strong. Strange,
almost outdated men. You can't help but like Chambers. He's good enough
at heart. He has his pet charities. He really, I believe, wants to help
the people. And I think he actually believes the best way to do it is to
gain a dictatorship over the Solar System. That ambition rules
everything in his life. It has hardened him and strengthened him. He
will crush ruthlessly, without a single qualm, anything that stands in
his path. That's why we'll have a fight on our hands."

       *       *       *       *       *

Craven seemed to be making little progress. They could only guess at
what he was trying to develop.

"I think," said Russ, "he's working on a collector field to suck in
radiant energy. If he really gets that, it will be something worth
having."

For hours Craven sat, an intent, untidy, unkempt man, sunk deep in the
cushions of an easy chair. His face was calm, with relaxed jaw and eyes
that seemed vacant. But each time he would rouse himself from the chair
to pencil new notations on the pads of paper that littered his desk. New
ideas, new approaches.

The triple televisor was completed except for one thing.

"Sound isn't so easy," said Russ. "If we could only find a way to
transmit it as well as light."

"Listen," said Greg, "why don't you try a condenser speaker."

"A condenser speaker?"

"Sure, the gadget developed way back in the 1920s. It hasn't been used
for years to my knowledge, but it might do the trick."

Russ grinned broadly. "Hell, why didn't I think of that? Here I've been
racking my brain for a new approach, a new wrinkle ... and exactly what
I wanted was at hand."

"Should work," declared Greg. "Just the opposite of a condenser
microphone. Instead of radiating sound waves mechanically, it radiates a
changing electric field and this field becomes audible directly within
the ear. Even yet no one seems to understand just how it works, but it
does ... and that's good enough."

"I know," said Russ. "It really makes no sound. In other words it
creates an electric field that doubles for sound. It ought to be just
the thing because nothing can stop it. Metal shielding can, I guess, if
it's thick enough, but it's got to be pretty damn thick."

It took time to set the mechanism up. Ready, the massive apparatus,
within which glowed a larger and more powerful force field, was operated
by two monstrous material energy engines. The controls were equipped
with clockwork drives, designed so that the motion of the Earth could be
nullified completely and automatically for work upon outlying planets.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ stood back and looked at it. "Stand in front of that screen, Greg,"
he said, "and we'll try it on you."

Greg stepped in front of the screen. The purr of power came on.
Suddenly, materializing out of the air, came Greg's projection. Hazy and
undefined at first, it rapidly assumed apparent solidity. Greg waved his
arm; the image moved its arm.

Russ left the controls and walked across the laboratory to inspect the
image. Examined from all sides, it looked solid. Russ walked through
it and felt nothing. There was nothing there. It was just a
three-dimensional image. But even from two feet away, it was as if the
man himself stood there in all the actuality of flesh and blood.

"Hello, Russ," the image whispered. It held out a hand. "Glad to see you
again."

Laughing, Russ thrust out his hand. It closed on nothing in mid-air, but
the two men appeared to shake hands.

They tested the machine that afternoon. Their images strode above the
trees, apparently walking on thin air. Gigantic replicas of Greg stood
on a faraway mountain top and shouted with a thunderous voice. Smaller
images, no more than two inches high, shinnied up a table leg.

Satisfied, they shut off the machine.

"That's one of the possibilities you mentioned," suggested Russ.

Greg nodded grimly.

       *       *       *       *       *

An autumn gale pelted the windows with driving rain, and a wild, wet
wind howled through the pines outside. The fire was leaping and flaring
in the fireplace.

Deep in his chair, Russ stared into the flame and puffed at his pipe.

"The factory wants more money on the spaceship," said Greg from the
other chair. "I had to put up some more shares as collateral on a new
loan."

"Market still going down?" asked Russ.

"Not the market," replied Greg. "My stocks. All of them hit new lows
today."

Russ dragged at the pipe thoughtfully. "I've been thinking about that
stock business, Greg."

"So have I, but it doesn't seem to do much good."

"Look," said Russ slowly, "what planets have exchanges?"

"All of them except Mercury. The Jovian exchange is at Ranthoor. There's
even one out at Pluto. Just mining and chemical shares listed, though."

Russ did not reply. Smoke curled up from his pipe. He was staring into
the fire.

"Why do you ask?" Greg wanted to know.

"Just something stirring around in my mind. I was wondering where
Chambers does most of his trading."

"Ranthoor now," said Greg. "Used to do it on Venus. The listing is
larger there. But since he took over the Jovian confederacy, he switched
his business to it. The transaction tax is lower. He saw to that."

"And the same shares are listed on the Callisto market as on the New
York boards?"

"Naturally," said Greg, "only not as many."

Russ watched the smoke from his pipe. "How long does it take light to
travel from Callisto to Earth?"

"Why, about 45 minutes, I guess. Somewhere around there." Greg sat
upright. "Say, what's light got to do with this?"

"A lot," said Russ. "All commerce is based on the assumption that light
is instantaneous, but it isn't. All business, anywhere throughout the
Solar System, is based on Greenwich time. When a noon signal sent out
from Earth reaches Mars, it's noon there, but as a matter of fact, it is
actually 15 minutes or so past noon. When the same signal reaches
Callisto, the correct time for the chronometer used in commerce would be
noon when it is really a quarter to one. That system simplifies things.
Does away with varying times. And it has worked all right so far because
there has been, up to now, nothing that could go faster than light. No
news can travel through space, no message, no signal can be sent at any
speed greater than that. So everything has been fine."

Greg had come out of the chair, was standing on his feet, the glow of
the blaze throwing his athletic figure into bold relief. That calm
exterior had been stripped from him now. He was excited.

"I see what you are getting at! We have something that is almost
instantaneous!"

"Almost," said Russ. "Not quite. There's a time lag somewhere. But it
isn't noticeable except over vast distances."

"But it would beat ordinary light signals to Callisto. It would beat
them there by almost 45 minutes."

"Almost," Russ agreed. "Maybe a split second less."

Greg strode up and down in front of the fireplace like a caged lion. "By
heaven," he said, "we've got Chambers where we want him. We can beat the
stock quotations to Callisto. With that advance knowledge of what the
board is doing in New York, we can make back every dime I've lost. We
can take Mr. Chambers to the cleaners!"

Russ grinned. "Exactly," he said. "We'll know 45 minutes in advance of
the other traders what the market will be. Let's see Chambers beat
that."




_CHAPTER SEVEN_


Ben Wrail was taking things easy. Stretched out in his chair, with his
cigar lit and burning satisfactorily, he listened to a radio program
broadcast from Earth.

Through the window beside him, he could look out of his skyscraper
apartment over the domed city of Ranthoor. Looming in the sky, slightly
distorted by the heavy quartz of the distant dome, was massive Jupiter,
a scarlet ball tinged with orange and yellow. Overwhelmingly luminous,
monstrously large, it filled a large portion of the visible sky, a sight
that brought millions of tourists to the Jovian moons each year, a sight
that even the old-timers still must stare at, drawn by some unfathomable
fascination.

Ben Wrail stared at it now, puffing at his cigar, listening to the
radio. An awe-inspiring thing, a looming planet that seemed almost ready
to topple and crash upon this airless, frigid world.

Wrail was an old-timer. For thirty years--Earth years--he had made his
home in Ranthoor. He had seen the city grow from a dinky little mining
camp enclosed by a small dome to one that boasted half a million
population. The dome that now covered the city was the fourth one. Four
times, like the nautilus, the city had outgrown its shell, until today
it was the greatest domed city in the Solar System. Where life had once
been cheap and where the scum of the system had held rendezvous, he had
seen Ranthoor grow into a city of dignity, capital of the Jovian
confederacy.

He had helped build that confederacy, had been elected a member of the
constitution commission, had helped create the government and for over a
decade had helped to make its laws.

But now ... Ben Wrail spat angrily and stuffed the cigar back in his
mouth again, taking a fresh and fearsome grip. Now everything had
changed. The Jovian worlds today were held in bond by Spencer Chambers.
The government was in the hands of his henchmen. Duly elected, of
course, but in an election held under the unspoken threat that
Interplanetary Power would withdraw, leaving the moons circling the
great planet without heat, air, energy. For the worlds of the Jovian
confederacy, every single one of them, depended for their life upon the
accumulators freighted outward from the Sun.

Talk of revolt was in the air, but, lacking a leader, it would get
nowhere. John Moore Mallory was imprisoned on one of the prison
spaceships that plied through the Solar System. Mallory, months ago, had
been secretly transferred from the Callisto prison to the spaceship, but
in a week's time the secret had been spread in angry whispers. If there
had been riots and bloodshed, they would have been to no purpose. For
revolution, even if successful, would gain nothing. It would merely goad
Interplanetary Power into withdrawing, refusing to service the domed
cities on the moons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ben Wrail stirred restlessly in his chair. The cigar had gone out. The
radio program blared unheard. His eyes still looked out the window
without seeing Jupiter.

"Damn," said Ben Wrail. Why did he have to go and spoil an evening
thinking about this damned political situation? Despite his part in the
building of the confederacy, he was a businessman, not a politician.
Still, it hurt to see something torn down that he had helped to build,
though he knew that every pioneering strike in history had been taken
over by shrewd, ruthless, powerful operators. Knowing that should have
helped, but it didn't. He and the other Jovian pioneers had hoped it
wouldn't happen and, of course, it had.

"Ben Wrail," said a voice in the room.

Wrail swung around, away from the window.

"Manning!" he yelled, and the man in the center of the room grinned
bleakly at him. "How did you come in without me hearing you? When did
you get here?"

"I'm not here," said Greg. "I'm back on Earth."

"You're what?" asked Wrail blankly. "That's a pretty silly statement,
isn't it, Manning? Or did you decide to loosen up and pull a gag now and
then?"

"I mean it," said Manning. "This is just an image of me. My body is back
on Earth."

"You mean you're dead? You're a ghost?"

The grin widened, but the face was bleak as ever.

"No, Ben, I'm just alive as you are. Let me explain. This is a
television image of me. Three-dimensional television. I can travel
anywhere like this."

Wrail sat down in the chair again. "I don't suppose there'd be any use
trying to shake hands with you."

"No use," agreed Manning's image. "There isn't any hand."

"Nor asking you to have a chair?"

Manning shook his head.

"Anyhow," said Wrail, "I'm damn glad to see you--or think I see you. I
don't know which. Figure you can stay and talk with me a while?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Certainly," said Manning. "That is what I came for. I want to ask your
help."

"Listen," declared Wrail, "you can't be on Earth, Manning. I say
something to you and you answer right back. That isn't possible. You
can't hear anything I say until 45 minutes after I say it, and then I'd
have to wait another 45 minutes to hear your answer."

"That's right," agreed the image, "if you insist upon talking about the
velocity of light. We have something better than that."

"We?"

"Russell Page and myself. We have a two-way television apparatus that
works almost instantaneously. To all purposes, so far as the distance
between Earth and Callisto is concerned, it is instantaneous."

Wrail's jaw fell. "Well, I be damned. What have you two fellows been up
to now?"

"A lot," said Manning laconically. "For one thing we are out to bust
Interplanetary Power. Bust them wide open. Hear that, Wrail?"

Wrail stared in stupefaction. "Sure, I hear. But I can't believe it."

"All right then," said Manning grimly, "we'll give you proof. What
could you do, Ben, if we told you what was happening on the stock market
in New York ... _without you having to wait the 45 minutes it takes the
quotations to get here_?"

Wrail sprang to his feet. "What could I do? Why, I could run the pants
off every trader in the exchange! I could make a billion a minute!" He
stopped and looked at the image. "But this isn't like you. This isn't
the way you'd do things."

"I don't want you to hurt anyone but Chambers," said Manning. "If
somebody else gets in the way, of course they have to take the rap along
with him. But I do want to give Chambers a licking. That's what I came
here to see you about."

"By Heaven, Greg, I'll do it," said Wrail. He stepped quickly forward,
held out his hand to close the deal, and encountered only air.

Manning's image threw back its head and laughed.

"That's your proof, Ben. Good enough?"

"I'll say it is," said Wrail shakily, looking down at the solid-seeming
hand that his own had gone right through.

       *       *       *       *       *

November 6, 2153, was a day long remembered in financial circles
throughout the Solar System. The Ranthoor market opened easy with little
activity. Then a few stocks made fractional gains. Mining dropped
fractionally. Martian Irrigation still was unexplainably low, as was
Pluto Chemical and Asteroid Mining.

Trading through two brokers, Ben Wrail bought 10,000 shares of Venus
Farms, Inc. when the market opened at 83-1/2. A few minutes later they
bought 10,000 shares of Spacesuits Ltd. at 106-1/4. The farm stocks
dropped off a point. Spacesuits gained a point. Then suddenly both rose.
In the second hour of trading the Venus stocks had boomed a full five
points and Wrail sold. Ten minutes later they sagged. At the end of the
day they were off two points from the opening. In late afternoon Wrail
threw his 10,000 shares of Spacesuits on the market, sold them at an
even 110. Before the close they had dropped back with a gain of only
half a point over the opening.

Those were only two transactions. There were others. Spaceship
Fabrication climbed three points before it fell and Wrail cashed in on
that. Mercury Metals rose two points and crashed back to close with a
full point loss. Wrail sold just before the break. He had realized a
cool half million in the day's trade.

The next day it was a million and then the man who had always been a
safe trader, who had always played the conservative side of the market,
apparently sure of his ground now, plunged deeper and deeper. It was
uncanny. Wrail knew when to buy and when to sell. Other traders watched
closely, followed his lead. He threw them off by using different brokers
to disguise his transactions.

Hectic day followed hectic day. Ben Wrail did not appear on the floor.
Calls to his office netted exactly nothing. Mr. Wrail was not in. So
sorry.

His brokers, well paid, were close-mouthed. They bought and sold. That
was all.

Seated in his office, Ben Wrail was busy watching two television screens
before him. One showed the board in the New York exchange. In the other
was the image of Gregory Manning, hunched in a chair in Page's mountain
laboratory back on Earth. And before Greg likewise were two screens, one
showing the New York exchange board, the other trained on Ben Wrail's
office.

"That Tourist stuff looks good," said Greg. "Why not buy a block of it?
I happen to know that Chambers owns a few shares. He'll be dabbling in
it."

Ben Wrail grinned. "It's made a couple of points, hasn't it? It's
selling here for 60 right now. In 45 minutes it'll be quoted at 62."

He picked up a telephone. "Buy all you can of Tourist," he said. "Right
away. I'll tell you when to sell. Get rid of whatever you have in Titan
Copper at 10:30."

"Better let go of your holdings of Ranthoor Dome," suggested Greg. "It's
beginning to slip."

"I'll watch it," promised Ben. "It may revive."

They lapsed into silence, watching the board in New York.

"You know, Greg," said Ben finally, "I really didn't believe all this
was true until I saw those credit certificates materialize on my desk."

"Simple," grunted Greg. "This thing we've got can take anything any
place. I could reach out there, grab you up and have you down here in a
split second."

Ben sucked his breath in between his teeth. "I'm not doubting anything
any more. You sent me half a billion two days ago. It's more than
doubled now."

He picked up the phone again and spoke to his broker on the other end.

"Unload Ranthoor Dome when she reaches 79."

       *       *       *       *       *

The real furor came on the Ranthoor floor when Wrail cornered Titan
Copper. Striking swiftly, he purchased the stock in huge blocks. The
shares rocketed as the exchanges throughout the System were thrown into
an uproar. Under the cover of the excitement he proceeded to corner
Spacesuits Ltd. Spacesuits zoomed.

For two days the main exchanges on four worlds were in a frenzy as
traders watched the shares climb swiftly. Operators representing
Interplanetary Power made offerings. No takers were reported. The shares
climbed.

Within one hour, however, the entire Wrail holdings in both stocks were
dumped on the market. The Interplanetary Power traders, frantic over the
prospect of losing control of the two important issues, bought heavily.
The price plummeted.

Spencer Chambers lost three billion or more on the deal. Overnight Ben
Wrail had become a billionaire many times over. Greg Manning added to
his own fortune.

"We have enough," said Greg. "We've given Chambers what he had coming to
him. Let's call it off."

"Glad to," agreed Ben. "It was just too damned easy."

"Be seeing you, Ben."

"I'll get down to Earth some day. Come see me when you have a minute.
Drop in for an evening."

"That's an invitation," said Greg. "It's easy with this three-dimension
stuff."

He reached out a hand, snapped a control. The screens in Wrail's office
went dead.

Wrail reached for a cigar, lit it carefully. He leaned back in his
chair, put his feet on the desk.

"By Heaven," he said satisfiedly, "I've never enjoyed anything so much
in all my life."




_CHAPTER EIGHT_


A giant cylindrical hull of finest beryl steel, the ship loomed in the
screen. A mighty ship, braced into absolute rigidity by monster cross
beams of shining steel. Glowing under the blazing lamps that lighted the
scene, it towered into the shadows of the factory, dwarfing the
scurrying workmen who swarmed over it.

"She's a beauty," said Russ, puffing at his pipe.

Greg nodded agreement. "They're working on her day and night to get her
finished. We may need it some day and need it in a hurry. If Chambers
really gets that machine of his to rolling, space will be the only place
big enough to hide in."

He chuckled, a grim chuckle, deep in his throat.

"But we won't have to hide long. Just until we get organized and then
will come the time when we'll call for the showdown. Chambers will have
to spread his cards."

Russ snapped the television switch and the screen went blank. The
laboratory suddenly was a place of queer lights and shadows, bulging
with grotesque machines, with sprawling apparatus, a place that hinted
darkly of vast power and mighty forces.

The scientist sat up in his chair. "We've come a long way, Greg. A long,
long way. We have the greatest power man has ever known; we have an
almost incomprehensible space drive; we have three-dimensional
television."

"And," said Greg dryly, "we took Chambers to the cleaners on the
market."

They sat in silence. Greg smelled the smoke from Russ's pipe, mixed with
the taint of lubricant and the faint lingering scent of ionized air.

"We mustn't underrate Chambers, however," he declared. "The man made one
mistake. He underrated us. We can't repeat his mistake. He is dangerous
all the time. He will stop at nothing. Not even murder."

"He's going easy now," said Russ. "He's hoping Craven can find something
that will either equal our stuff or beat it. But Craven isn't having any
luck. He's still driving himself on the radiation theory, but he doesn't
seem to make much headway."

"If he got it, just what would it mean?"

"Plenty. With that he could turn all radiations in space to work. The
cosmics, heat, light, everything. Space is full of radiation."

"If it hadn't been for Wilson," Greg said, his voice a snarl, "we
wouldn't have to be worrying about Chambers. Chambers wouldn't know
until we were ready to let him know."

"Wilson!" ejaculated Russ, suddenly leaning forward. "I had forgotten
about Wilson. What do you say we try to find him?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Harry Wilson sat at his table in the Martian Club and watched the exotic
Martian dance, performed by near-nude girls. Smoke trailed up lazily
from his drooping cigarette as he watched through squinted eyes. There
was something about the dance that got under Wilson's skin.

The music rose, then fell to whispering undertones and suddenly,
unexpectedly, crashed and stopped. The girls were running from the
floor. A wave of smooth, polite applause rippled around the tables.

Wilson sighed and reached for his wine glass. He crushed the cigarette
into a tray and sipped his wine. He glanced around the room, scanning
the bobbing, painted faces of the night--the great, the near-great, the
near-enough-to-touch-the-great. Brokers and businessmen, artists and
writers and actors. There were others, too, queer night-life shadows
that no one knew much about, or that one heard too much about ... the
playboys and the ladies of family and fortune, correctly attired men,
gorgeously, sleekly attired women.

And--Harry Wilson. The waiters called him Mr. Wilson. He heard people
whispering about him asking who he was. His soul soaked it in and cried
for more. Good food, good drinks, the pastels of the walls, the soft
lights and weird, exotic music. The cold but colorful correctness of it
all.

Just two months ago he had stood outside the club, a stranger in the
city, a mechanic from a little out-of-the-way laboratory, a man who was
paid a pittance for his skill. He had stood outside and watched his
employers walk up the steps and through the magic doors. He had watched
in bitterness....

But now!

The orchestra was striking up a tune. A blonde nodded at him from a
near-by table. Solemnly, with the buzz of wine in his brain and its
hotness in his blood, he returned the nod.

Someone was speaking to him, calling him by name. He looked around, but
there was no one looking at him now. And once again, through that flow
of music, through the hum of conversation, through the buzzing of his
own brain, came the voice, cold and sharp as steel:

"Harry Wilson!"

It sent a shudder through him. He reached for the wine glass again, but
his hand stopped half-way to the stem, paused and trembled at what he
saw.

       *       *       *       *       *

For there was a gray vagueness in front of him, a sort of shimmer of
nothingness, and out of that shimmer materialized a pencil.

As he watched, in stricken terror, the point of the pencil dropped to
the tablecloth and slowly, precisely, it started to move. He stared,
hypnotized, unbelieving, with the fingers of madness probing at his
brain. The pencil wrote:

    Wilson, you sold me out.

The man at the table tried to speak, tried to shriek, but his tongue and
throat were dry and only harsh breath rattled in his mouth.

The pencil moved on mercilessly:

    But you will pay. No matter where you go, I will find you. You
    cannot hide from me.

The pencil slowly lifted its point from the table and suddenly was gone,
as if it had never been. Wilson, eyes wide and filled with terrible
fear, stared at the black words on the cloth.

    Wilson, you sold me out. But you will pay. No matter where you go, I
    will find you. You cannot hide from me.

The music pulsated in the room, the hum of conversation ran like an
undertone, but Wilson did not hear. His entire consciousness was
centered on the writing, the letters and the words that filled his soul
with dread.

Something seemed to snap within him. The cold wind of terror reached out
and struck at him. He staggered from the chair. His hand swept the wine
glass from the table and it shattered into chiming shards.

"They can't do this to me!" he shrieked.

There was a silence in the room a silence of terrible accusation.
Everyone was staring at him. Eyebrows raised.

       *       *       *       *       *

A waiter was at his elbow. "Do you feel ill, sir?"

And then, on unsteady feet, he was being led away. Behind him he heard
the music once again, heard the rising hum of voices.

Someone set his hat on his head, was holding his coat. The cold air of
the night struck his face and the doors sighed closed behind him.

"I'd take it easy going down the step, sir," counseled the doorman.

An aero-taxi driver held open the door of the cab and saluted.

"Where to, sir?"

Wilson stumbled in and stammered out his address. The taxi droned into
the traffic lane.

Hands twitching, Wilson fumbled with the key, took minutes to open the
door into his apartment. Finally the lock clicked and he pushed open the
door. His questing finger found the wall switch. Light flooded the room.

Wilson heaved a sigh of relief. He felt safe here. This place belonged
to him. It was his home, his retreat....

A low laugh, hardly more than a chuckle, sounded behind him. He whirled
and for a moment, blinking in the light, he saw nothing. Then something
stirred by one of the windows, gray and vague, like a sheet of moving
fog.

As he watched, shrinking back against the wall, the grayness deepened,
took the form of a man. And out of that mistiness a face was etched, a
face that had no single line of humor in it, a bleak face with the fire
of anger in the eyes.

"Manning!" shrieked Wilson. "Manning!" He wheeled and sprinted for the
door, but the gray figure moved, too ... incredibly fast, as if it were
wind-blown vapor, and barred his path to the door.

"Why are you running away?" Manning's voice mocked. "Certainly you
aren't afraid of me."

"Look," Wilson whimpered, "I didn't think of what it meant. I just was
tired of working the way Page made me work. Tired of the little salary I
got. I wanted money. I was hungry for money."

"So you sold us out," said Manning.

"No," cried Wilson, "I didn't think of it that way. I didn't stop to
think."

"Think now, then," said Manning gravely. "Think of this. No matter where
you are, no matter where you go, no matter what you do, I'll always be
watching you, I'll never let you rest. I'll never give you a minute's
peace."

"Please," pleaded Wilson. "Please, go away and leave me. I'll give you
back the money ... there's some of it left."

"You sold out for twenty thousand," said Manning. "You could have gotten
twenty million. Chambers would have paid that much to know what you
could tell him, because it was worth twenty billion."

Wilson's breath was coming in panting gasps. He dropped his coat and
backed away. The back of his knees collided with a chair and he folded
up, sat down heavily, still staring at the gray mistiness that was a
man.

"Think of that, Wilson," Manning went on sneeringly. "You could have
been a millionaire. Maybe even a billionaire. You could have had all the
fine things these other people have. But you only got twenty thousand."

"What can I do?" begged Wilson.

The misty face split in a sardonic grin.

"I don't believe there's anything left for you to do."

Before Wilson's eyes the face dissolved, lost its lines, seemed to melt
away. Only streaming, swirling mist, then a slight refraction in the air
and then nothing.

Slowly Wilson rose to his feet, reached for the bottle of whiskey on the
table. His hand shook so that the liquor splashed. When he raised the
glass to his mouth, his still-shaking hand poured half the drink over
his white shirt front.




_CHAPTER NINE_


Ludwig Stutsman pressed his thin, straight lips together. "So that's the
setup," he said.

Across the desk Spencer Chambers studied the man. Stutsman was like a
wolf, lean and cruel and vicious. He even looked like a wolf, with his
long, thin face, his small, beady eyes, the thin, bloodless lips. But he
was the kind of man who didn't always wait for instructions, but went
ahead and used his own judgment. And in a ruthless sort of way, his
judgment was always right.

"Only as a last resort," cautioned Chambers, "do I want you to use the
extreme measures you are so fond of using. If they should prove
necessary, we can always use them. But not yet. I want to settle this
thing in the quietest way possible. Page and Manning are two men who
can't simply disappear. There'd be a hunt, an investigation, an ugly
situation."

"I understand," agreed Stutsman. "If something should happen to their
notes, if somebody could find them. Perhaps you. If you found them on
your desk one morning."

The two men measured one another with their eyes, more like enemies
than men working for the same ends.

"Not my desk," snapped Chambers, "Craven's. So that Craven could
discover this new energy. Whatever Craven discovers belongs to
Interplanetary."

Chambers rose from his chair and walked to the window, looked out. After
a moment's time, he turned and walked back again, sat down in his chair.
Leaning back, he matched his fingertips, his teeth flashing in a grin
under his mustache.

"I don't know anything about what's going on," he said. "I don't even
know someone has discovered material energy. That's up to Craven. He has
to find it. Both you and Craven work alone. I know nothing about either
of you."

Stutsman's jaw closed like a steel trap. "I've always worked alone."

"By the way," said Chambers, the edge suddenly off his voice, "how are
things going in the Jovian confederacy? I trust you left everything in
good shape."

"As good as could be expected," Stutsman replied. "The people are still
uneasy, half angry. They still remember Mallory."

"But Mallory," objected Chambers, "is on a prison ship. In near Mercury
now, I believe."

Stutsman shook his head. "They still remember him. We'll have trouble
out there one of these days."

"I would hate to have that happen," remarked Chambers softly. "I would
regret it very much. I sent you out there to see that nothing happened."

"The trouble out there won't be a flash to this thing you were telling
me about," snapped Stutsman.

"I'm leaving that in your hands, too," Chambers told him. "I know you
can take care of it."

Stutsman rose. "I can take care of it."

"I'm sure you can," Chambers said.

He remained standing after Stutsman left, looking at the door through
which the man had gone. Maybe it had been a mistake to call Stutsman in
from Callisto. Maybe it was a mistake to use Stutsman at all. He didn't
like a lot of things the man did ... or the way he did them. Brutal
things.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly Chambers sat down again and his face grew hard.

He had built an empire of many worlds. That couldn't be done with gentle
methods and no sure goal. Fighting every inch from planet to planet, he
had used power to gain power. And now that empire was threatened by two
men who had found a greater power. That threat had to be smashed! It
would be smashed!

Chambers leaned forward and pressed a buzzer.

"Yes, Mr. Chambers?" said a voice in the communicator.

"Send Dr. Craven in," commanded Chambers.

Craven came in, slouchily, his hair standing on end, his eyes peering
through the thick-lensed glasses.

"You sent for me," he growled, taking a chair.

"Yes, I did," said Chambers. "Have a drink?"

"No. And no smoke either."

Chambers took a long cigar from the box on his desk, clipped off the end
and rolled it in his mouth.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm a busy man," Craven reminded him.

Puckering lines of amusement wrinkled Chambers' eyes as he lit up,
watching Craven.

"You do seem to be busy, Doctor," he said. "I only wish you had
something concrete to report."

The scientist bristled. "I may have in a few days, if you leave me alone
and let me work."

"I presume that you are still working on your radiation collector. Any
progress?"

"Not too much. You can't expect a man to turn out discoveries to order.
I'm working almost night and day now. If the thing can be solved, I'll
solve it."

Chambers glowed. "Keep up the good work. But I wanted to talk to you
about something else. You heard, I suppose, that I lost a barrel of
money on the Ranthoor exchange."

Craven smiled, a sardonic twisting of his lips. "I heard something about
it."

"I thought you had," said Chambers sourly. "If not, you would have been
the only one who hadn't heard how Ben Wrail took Chambers for a ride."

"He really took you then," commented Craven. "I thought maybe it was
just one of those stories."

"He took me, but that's not what's worrying me. I want to know how he
did it. No man, not even the most astute student of the market, could
have foretold the trend of the market the way he did. And Wrail isn't
the most astute. It isn't natural when a man who has always played the
safe side suddenly turns the market upside down. Even less natural when
he never makes a mistake."

"Well," demanded Craven, "what do you want me to do about it? I'm a
scientist. I've never owned a share of stock in my life."

"There's an angle to it that might interest you," said Chambers
smoothly, leaning back, puffing at the cigar. "Wrail is a close friend
of Manning. And Wrail himself didn't have the money it took to swing
those deals. Somebody furnished that money."

"Manning?" asked Craven.

"What do you think?"

"If Manning's mixed up in it," said Craven acidly, "there isn't anything
any of us can do about it. You're bucking money and genius together.
This Manning is no slouch of a scientist himself and Page is better.
They're a combination."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You think they're good?" asked Chambers.

"Good? Didn't they discover material energy?" The scientist glowered at
his employer. "That ought to be answer enough."

"Yes, I know," Chambers agreed irritably. "But can you tell me how they
worked this market deal?"

Craven grimaced. "I can guess. Those boys didn't stop with just finding
how to harness material energy. They probably have more things than you
can even suspect. They were working with force fields, you remember,
when they stumbled onto the energy. Force fields are something we don't
know much about. A man monkeying around with them is apt to find almost
anything."

"What are you getting at?"

"My guess would be that they have a new kind of television working in
the fourth dimension, using time as a factor. It would penetrate
anything. Nothing could stop it. It could go anywhere, at a speed many
times the speed of light ... almost instantaneously."

Chambers sat upright in his chair. "Are you _sure_ about this?"

Craven shook his head. "Just a guess. I tried to figure out what I would
do if I were Page and Manning and had the things they had. That's all."

"And what would you do?"

Craven smiled dourly. "I'd be using that television right in this
office," he said. "I'd keep you and me under observation all the time.
If what I think is true, Manning is watching us now and has heard every
word we said."

Chambers' face was a harsh mask of anger. "I don't believe it could be
done!"

"Doctor Craven is right," said a quiet voice.

Chambers swung around in his chair and gasped. Greg Manning stood inside
the room, just in front of the desk.

"I hope you don't mind," said Greg. "I've been wanting to have a talk
with you."

Craven leaped to his feet, his eyes shining. "Three dimensions!" he
whispered. "How did you do it?"

Greg chuckled. "I haven't patented the idea, Doctor. I'd rather not tell
you just now."

"You will accept my congratulations, however?" asked Craven.

"That's generous of you. I really hadn't expected this much."

"I mean it," said Craven. "Damned if I don't." Chambers was on his feet,
leaning across the desk, with his hand held out. Greg's right hand came
out slowly.

"Sorry, I really can't shake hands," he said. "I'm not here, you know.
Just my image."

Chambers' hand dropped to the desk. "Stupid of me not to realize that.
You looked so natural." He sat back in his chair again, brushed his gray
mustache. A smile twisted his lips. "So you've been watching me?"

"Off and on," Greg said.

"And what is the occasion of this visit?" asked Chambers. "You could
have held a distinct advantage by remaining unseen. I didn't entirely
believe what Craven told me, you know."

"That isn't the point at all," declared Greg. "Maybe we can get to
understand one another."

"So you're ready to talk business."

"Not in the sense you mean," Greg said. "I'm not willing to make
concessions, but there's no reason why we have to fight one another."

"Why, no," said Chambers, "there's no reason for that. I'll be willing
to buy your discovery."

"I wouldn't sell it to you," Greg told him.

"You wouldn't? Why not? I'm prepared to pay for it."

"You'd pay the price, all right. Anything I asked ... even if it
bankrupted you. Then you'd mark it down to loss, and scrap material
energy. And I'll tell you why."

       *       *       *       *       *

A terrible silence hung in the room as the two men eyed one another
across the table.

"You wouldn't use it," Greg went on, "because it would remove the
stranglehold you have on the planets. It would make power too cheap. It
would eliminate the necessity of your rented accumulators. The Jovian
moons and Mars could stand on their feet without the power you ship to
them. You could make billions in legitimate profits selling the
apparatus to manufacture the energy ... but you wouldn't want that. You
want to be dictator of the Solar System. And that is what I intend to
stop."

"Listen, Manning," said Chambers, "you're a reasonable man. Let's talk
this thing over without anger. What do you plan to do?"

"I could put my material engines on the market," said Greg. "That would
ruin you. You wouldn't move an accumulator after that. Your
Interplanetary stock wouldn't be worth the paper it is written on.
Material energy would wipe you out."

"You forget I have franchises on those planets," Chambers reminded him.
"I'd fight you in the courts until hell froze over."

"I'd prove convenience, economy and necessity. Any court in any land, on
any planet, would rule for me."

Chambers shook his head. "Not Martian or Jovian courts. I'd tell them to
rule for me and the courts outside of Earth do what I tell them to."

       *       *       *       *       *

Greg straightened and backed from the desk. "I hate to ruin a man.
You've worked hard. You've built a great company. I would be willing, in
return for a hands-off policy on your part, to hold up any announcement
of my material energy until you had time to get out, to save what you
could."

Hard fury masked Chambers' face. "You'll never build a material energy
engine outside your laboratory. Don't worry about ruining me. I won't
allow you to stand in my way. I hope you understand."

"I understand too well. But even if you are a dictator out on Mars and
Venus, even if you do own Mercury and boss the Jovian confederacy,
you're just a man to me. A man who stands for things that I don't like."

Greg stopped and his eyes were like ice crystals.

"You talked to Stutsman today," he said. "If I were you, I wouldn't let
Stutsman do anything rash. Russ Page and I might have to fight back."

Mockery tinged Chambers' voice. "Am I to take this as a declaration of
war, Mr. Manning?"

"Take it any way you like," Greg said. "I came here to give you a
proposition, and you tell me you're going to smash me. All I have to say
to you, Chambers, is this--when you get ready to smash me, you'd better
have a deep, dark hole all picked out for yourself to hide in. Because
I'll hand you back just double anything you hand out."




_CHAPTER TEN_


"One of us will have to watch all the time," Greg told Russ. "We can't
take any chances. Stutsman will try to reach us sooner or later and we
have to be ready for him."

He glanced at the new radar screen they had set up that morning beside
the bank of other controls. Any ship coming within a hundred miles of
the laboratory would be detected instantly and pinpointed.

The board flashed now. In the screen they saw a huge passenger ship
spearing down toward the airport south of them.

"With the port that close," said Russ, "we'll get a lot of signals."

"I ordered the Belgium factory to rush work on the ship," said Greg.
"But it will be a couple of weeks yet. We just have to sit tight and
wait. As soon as we have the ship we'll start in on Chambers; but until
we get the ship, we just have to dig in and stay on the defensive."

He studied the scene in the screen. The ship had leveled off, was
banking in to the port. His eyes turned away, took in the laboratory
with its crowding mass of machinery.

"We don't want to fool ourselves about Chambers," he said. "He may not
have the power here on Earth that he does on the other planets, but he's
got plenty. Feeling the way he does, he'll try to finish us off in a
hurry now."

Russ reached out to the table that stood beside the bank of controls and
picked up a small, complicated mechanism. Its face bore nine dials, with
the needles on three of them apparently registering, the other six
motionless.

"What is that?" asked Greg.

"A mechanical detective," said Russ. "A sort of mechanical shadow. While
you were busy with the stock market stunt, I made several of them. One
for Wilson and another for Chambers and still another for Craven." He
hoisted and lowered the one in his hand. "This one is for Stutsman."

"A shadow?" asked Greg. "Do you mean that thing will trail Stutsman?"

"Not only trail him," said Russ. "It will find him, wherever he may be.
Some object every person wears or carries is made of iron or some other
magnetic metal. This 'shadow' contains a tiny bit of that ridiculous
military decoration that Stutsman never allows far away from him. Find
that decoration and you find Stutsman. In another one I have a chunk of
Wilson's belt buckle, that college buckle, you know, that he's so proud
of. Chambers has a ring made of a piece of meteoric iron and that's the
bait for another machine. Have a tiny piece off Craven's spectacles in
his machine. It was easy to get the stuff. The force field enables a man
to reach out and take anything he wants to, from a massive machine to a
microscopic bit of matter. It was a cinch to get the stuff I needed."

Russ chuckled and put the machine back on the table. He gestured toward
it.

"It maintains a tiny field similar to our television field," he
explained. "But it's modified along a special derivation with a magnetic
result. It can follow and find the original mass of any metallic
substance it may contain."

"Clever," commented Greg.

Russ lit his pipe, puffed comfortably. "We needed something like that."

The red light on the board snapped on and blinked. Russ reached out and
slammed home the lever, twirled dials. It was only another passenger
ship. They relaxed, but not too much.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I wonder what he's up to," said Russ.

Stutsman's car had stopped in the dock section of New York. Crumbling,
rotting piers and old tumbledown warehouses, deserted and unused since
the last ship sailed the ocean before giving way to air commerce, loomed
darkly, like grim ghosts, in the darkness.

Stutsman had gotten out of the car and said: "Wait here."

"Yes, sir," said the voice of the driver.

Stutsman strode away, down a dark street. The televisor kept pace with
him and on the screen he could be seen as a darker shape moving among
the shadows of that old, almost forgotten section of the Solar System's
greatest city.

Another shadow detached itself from the darkness of the street, shuffled
toward Stutsman.

"Sir," said a whining voice, "I haven't eaten ..."

There was a swift movement as Stutsman's stick lashed out, a thud as it
connected with the second shadow's head. The shadow crumpled on the
pavement. Stutsman strode on.

Greg sucked in his breath. "He isn't very sociable tonight."

Stutsman ducked into an alley where even deeper darkness lay. Russ, with
a delicate adjustment, slid the televisor along, closer to Stutsman,
determined not to lose sight of him for an instant.

The man suddenly turned into a doorway so black that nothing could be
seen. Sounds of sharp, impatient rappings came out of the screen as
Stutsman struck the door with his stick.

Brilliant illumination sprang out over the doorway, but Stutsman seemed
not to see it, went on knocking. The colors on the screen were
peculiarly distorted.

"Ultra-violet," grunted Greg. "Whoever he's calling on wants to have a
good look before letting anybody in."

The door creaked open and a shaft of normal light spewed out into the
street, turning its murkiness to pallid yellow.

Stutsman stepped inside.

The man at the door jerked his head. "Back room," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The televisor slid through the door into the lighted room behind
Stutsman. Dust lay thick on the woodwork and floors. Patches of plaster
had broken away. Furrows zigzagged across the floor, marking the path of
heavy boxes or furniture which had been pushed along in utter disdain of
the flooring. Cheap wall-paper hung in tatters from the walls, streaked
with water from some broken pipe.

But the back room was a startling contrast to the first. Rich,
comfortable furniture filled it. The floor was covered with a
steel-cloth rug and steel-cloth hangings, colorfully painted, hid the
walls.

A man sat under a lamp, reading a newspaper. He rose to his feet, like
the sudden uncoiling of springs.

Russ gasped. That face was one of the best known faces in the entire
Solar System. A ratlike face, with cruel cunning printed on it that had
been on front pages and TV screens often, but never for pay.

"Scorio!" whispered Russ.

Greg nodded and his lips were drawn tight.

"Stutsman," said Scorio, surprised. "You're the last person in the world
I was expecting. Come in. Have a chair. Make yourself comfortable."

Stutsman snorted. "This isn't a social call."

"I didn't figure it was," replied the gangster, "but sit down anyway."

Gingerly Stutsman sat down on the edge of a chair, hunched forward.
Scorio resumed his seat and waited.

"I have a job for you," Stutsman announced bluntly.

"Fine. It isn't often you have one for me. Three-four years ago, wasn't
it?"

"We may be watched," warned Stutsman.

The mobster started from his chair, his eyes darting about the room.

Stutsman grunted disgustedly. "If we're watched, there isn't anything we
can do about it."

"We can't, huh?" snarled the gangster. "Why not?"

"Because the watcher is on the West Coast. We can't reach him. If he's
watching, he can see every move we make, hear every word we say."

"Who is it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Greg Manning or Russ Page," said Stutsman. "You've heard of them?"

"Sure. I heard of them."

"They have a new kind of television," said Stutsman. "They can see and
hear everything that's happening on Earth, perhaps in all the Solar
System. But I don't think they're watching us now. Craven has a machine
that can detect their televisor. It registers certain field effects they
use. They weren't watching when I left Craven's laboratory just a few
minutes ago. They may have picked me up since, but I don't think so."

"So Craven has made a detector," said Greg calmly. "He can tell when
we're watching now."

"He's a clever cuss," agreed Russ.

"Take a look at that machine now," urged Scorio. "See if they're
watching. You shouldn't have come here. You should have let me know and
I would have met you some place. I can't have people knowing where my
hideout is."

"Quiet down," snapped Stutsman. "I haven't got the machine. It weighs
half a ton."

Scorio sank deeper into his chair, worried. "Do you want to take a
chance and talk business?"

"Certainly. That's why I'm here. This is the proposition. Manning and
Page are working in a laboratory out on the West Coast, in the
mountains. I'll give you the exact location later. They have some papers
we want. We wouldn't mind if something happened to the laboratory. It
might, for example blow up. But we want the papers first."

       *       *       *       *       *

Scorio said nothing. His face was quiet and cunning.

"Give me the papers," said Stutsman, "and I'll see that you get to any
planet you want to. And I'll give you two hundred thousand in
Interplanetary Credit certificates. Give me proof that the laboratory
blew up or melted down or something else happened to it and I'll boost
the figure to five hundred thousand."

Scorio did not move a muscle as he asked: "Why don't you have some of
your own mob do this job?"

"Because I can't be connected with it in any way," said Stutsman. "If
you slip up and something happens, I won't be able to do a thing for
you. That's why the price is high."

The gangster's eyes slitted. "If the papers are worth that much to you,
why wouldn't they be worth as much to me?"

"They wouldn't be worth a dime to you."

"Why not?"

"Because you couldn't read them," said Stutsman.

"I can read," retorted the gangster.

"Not the kind of language on those papers. There aren't more than two
dozen people in the Solar System who could read it, perhaps a dozen who
could understand it, maybe half a dozen who could follow the directions
in the papers." He leaned forward and jabbed a forefinger at the
gangster. "And there are only two people in the System who could write
it."

"What the hell kind of a language is it that only two dozen people could
read?"

"It isn't a language, really. It's mathematics."

"Oh, arithmetic."

"No," Stutsman said. "Mathematics. You see? You don't even know the
difference between the two, so what good would the papers do you?"

Scorio nodded. "Yeah, you're right."




_CHAPTER ELEVEN_


The Paris-Berlin express thundered through the night, a gigantic ship
that rode high above the Earth. Far below one could see the dim lights
of eastern Europe.

Harry Wilson pressed his face against the window, staring down. There
was nothing to see but the tiny lights. They were alone, he and the
other occupants of the ship ... alone in the dark world that surrounded
them.

But Wilson sensed some other presence in the ship, someone besides the
pilot and his mechanics up ahead, the hostess and the three stodgy
traveling men who were his fellow passengers.

Wilson's hair ruffled at the base of his skull, tingling with an unknown
fear that left him shaken.

A voice whispered in his ear: "Harry Wilson. So you are running away!"

Just a tiny voice that seemed hardly a voice at all, it seemed at once
to come from far away and yet from very near. The voice, with an edge of
coldness on it, was one he never would forget.

He cowered in his seat, whimpering.

The voice came again: "Didn't I tell you that you couldn't run away?
That no matter where you went, I'd find you?"

"Go away," Wilson whispered huskily. "Leave me alone. Haven't you
hounded me enough?"

"No," answered the voice, "not enough. Not yet. You sold us out. You
warned Chambers about our energy and now Chambers is sending men to kill
us. But they won't succeed, Wilson."

"You can't hurt me," said Wilson defiantly. "You can't do anything but
talk to me. You're trying to drive me mad, but you can't. I won't let
you. I'm not going to pay any more attention to you."

The whisper chuckled.

"You can't," argued Wilson wildly. "All you can do is talk to me. You've
never done anything but that. You drove me out of New York and out of
London and now you're driving me out of Paris. But Berlin is as far as I
will go. I won't listen to you any more."

"Wilson," whispered the voice, "look inside your bag. The bag, Wilson,
where you are carrying that money. That stack of credit certificates.
Almost eleven thousand dollars, what is left of the twenty thousand
Chambers paid you."

With a wild cry Wilson clawed at his bag, snapped it open, pawed through
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The credit certificates were gone!

"You took my money," he shrieked. "You took everything I had. I haven't
got a cent. Nothing except a few dollars in my pocket."

"You haven't got that either, Wilson," whispered the voice.

There was a sound of ripping cloth as something like a great, powerful
hand flung aside Wilson's coat, tore away the inside pocket. There was a
brief flash of a wallet and a bundle of papers, which vanished.

The hostess was hurrying toward him.

"Is there something wrong?"

"They took ..." Wilson began and stopped.

What could he tell her? Could he say that a man half way across the
world had robbed him?

The three traveling men were looking at him.

"I'm sorry, miss," he stammered. "I really am. I fell asleep and
dreamed."

He sat down again, shaken. Shivering, he huddled back into the corner of
his seat. His hands explored the torn coat pocket. He was stranded, high
in the air, somewhere between Paris and Berlin ... stranded without
money, without a passport, with nothing but the clothes he wore and the
few personal effects in his bag.

Fighting to calm himself, he tried to reason out his plight. The plane
was entering the Central European Federation and that, definitely, was
no place to be without a passport or without visible means of support. A
thousand possibilities flashed through his mind. They might think he was
a spy. He might be cited for illegal entry. He might be framed by secret
police.

Terror perched on his shoulder and whispered to him. He shivered
violently and drew farther back into the corner of the seat. He clasped
his hands, beat them against his huddled knees.

He would cable friends back in America and have them identify him and
vouch for his character. He would borrow some money from them, just
enough to get back to America. But whom would he cable? And with aching
bitterness in his breast, Harry Wilson came face to face with the
horrible realization that nowhere in the world, nowhere in the Solar
System, was there a single person who was his friend. There was no one
to help him.

He bowed his head in his hands and sobbed, his shoulders jerking
spasmodically, the sobs racking his body.

The traveling men stared at him unable to understand. The hostess looked
briskly helpless. Wilson knew he looked like a scared fool and he didn't
care.

He _was_ scared.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gregory Manning riffled the sheaf of credit certificates, the wallet,
the passport and pile of other papers that lay upon the desk in front of
him.

"That closes one little incident," he said grimly. "That takes care of
our friend Wilson."

"Maybe you were a bit too harsh with him, Greg," suggested Russell Page.

Greg shook his head. "He was a traitor, the lowest thing alive. He sold
the confidence we placed in him. He traded something that was not his to
trade. He did it for money and now I've taken that money from him."

He shoved the pile of certificates to one side.

"Now I've got this stuff," he said, "I don't know what to do with it. We
don't want to keep it."

"Why not send it to Chambers?" suggested Russ. "He will find the
passport and the money on his desk in the morning. Give him something to
think about tomorrow."




_CHAPTER TWELVE_


Scorio snarled at the four men: "I want you to get the thing done right.
I don't want bungling. Understand?"

The bulky, flat-faced man with the scar across his cheek shuffled
uneasily. "We went over it a dozen times. We know just what to do."

He grinned at Scorio, but the grin was lopsided, more like a sneering
grimace. At one time the man had failed to side-step a heat ray and it
had left a neat red line drawn across the right cheek, nipped the end of
the ear.

"All right, Pete," said Scorio, glaring at the man, "your job is the
heavy work, so just keep your mind on it. You've got the two heaters and
the kit."

Pete grinned lopsidedly again. "Yeah, my own kit. I can open anything
hollow with this rig."

"You got a real job tonight," snarled Scorio. "Two doors and a safe.
Sure you can do it?"

"Just leave it to me," Pete growled.

"Chizzy, you're to pilot," Scorio snapped. "Know the coordinates?"

"Sure," said Chizzy, "know them by heart. Do it with my eyes shut."

"Keep your eyes open. We can't have anything go wrong. This is too
important. You swoop in at top speed and land on the roof. Stand by the
controls and keep a hand on the big heater just in case of trouble.
Pete, Max and Reg will go to the lockdoor. Reg will stay there with the
buzzer and three drums of ammunition."

He whirled on Reg. "You got that ammunition?"

Reg nodded emphatically. "Four drums of it," he said. "One solid round
in the gun. Another drum of solid and two explosive."

"There's a thousand rounds in each drum," snapped Scorio, "but they last
only a minute, so do your firing in bursts."

"I ain't handled buzzers all these years without knowing something about
them."

"There's only two men there," said Scorio, "and they'll probably be
asleep. Come down with your motor dead. The lab roof is thick and the
plane landing on those thick tires won't wake them. But be on your guard
all the time. Pete and Max will go through the lockdoor into the
laboratory and open the safe. Dump all the papers and money and whatever
else you find into the bags and then get out fast. Hop into the plane
and take off. When you're clear of the building, turn the heaters on it.
I want it melted down and the men and stuff inside with it. Don't leave
even a button unmelted. Get it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sure, chief," said Pete. He dusted his hands together.

"Now get going. Beat it."

The four men turned and filed out of the room, through the door leading
to the tumbledown warehouse where was hidden the streamlined metal ship.
Swiftly they entered it and the ship nosed gently upward, blasting out
through a broken, frameless skylight, climbing up and up, over the
gleaming spires of New York.

Back in the room hung with steel-cloth curtains, alone, Scorio lit a
cigarette and chuckled. "They won't have a chance," he said.

"Who won't?" asked a tiny voice from almost in front of him.

"Why, Manning and Page ..." said Scorio, and then stopped. The fire of
the match burned down and scorched his fingers. He dropped it. "Who
asked that?" he roared.

"I did," said the piping voice.

Scorio looked down. A three-inch man sat on a matchbox on the desk!

"Who are you?" the gangster shouted.

"I'm Manning," said the little man. "The one you're going to kill. Don't
you remember?"

"Damn you!" shrieked Scorio. His hand flipped open a drawer and pulled
out a flame pistol. The muzzle of the pistol came up and blasted.
Screwed down to its smallest diameter, the gun's aim was deadly. A
straight lance of flame, no bigger than a pencil, streamed out, engulfed
the little man, bored into the table top. The box of matches exploded
with a gush of red that was a dull flash against the blue blaze of the
gun.

But the figure of the man stood _within the flame_! Stood there and
waved an arm at Scorio. The piping voice came out of the heart of the
gun's breath.

"Maybe I'd better get a bit smaller. Make me harder to hit. More sport
that way."

       *       *       *       *       *

Scorio's finger lifted from the trigger. The flame snapped off.
Laboriously climbing out of the still smoking furrow left in the oaken
table top was Greg Manning, not more than an inch tall now.

The gangster laid the gun on the table, stepped closer, warily. With the
palm of a mighty hand he swatted viciously at the little figure.

"I got you now!"

But the figure seemed to ooze upright between his fingers, calmly
stepped off his hand onto the table. And now it began to grow. Watching
it, Scorio saw it grow to six inches and there it stopped.

"What are you?" he breathed.

"I told you," said the little image. "I'm Gregory Manning. The man you
set out to kill. I've watched every move you've made and known
everything you planned."

"But that isn't possible," protested Scorio. "You're out on the West
Coast. This is some trick. I'm just seeing things."

"You aren't seeing anything imaginary. I'm really here, in this room
with you. I could lift my finger and kill you if I wished ... and maybe
I should."

Scorio stepped back a pace.

"But I'm not going to," said Manning. "I have something better saved for
you. Something more appropriate."

"You can't touch me!"

"Look," said Manning sternly. He pointed his finger at a chair. It
suddenly grew cloudy, became a wisp of trailing smoke, was gone.

The gangster backed away, eyes glued to the spot where the chair had
vanished.

"Look here," piped the little voice. Scorio jerked his head around and
looked.

The chair was in Manning's hand. A tiny chair, but the very one that had
disappeared from the room a moment before.

"Watch out!" warned Manning, and heaved the chair. The tiny chair
seemed to float in the air. Then with a rush it gathered speed, grew
larger. In a split second it was a full-sized chair and it was hurtling
straight at the gangster's head.

With a strangled cry Scorio threw up his arms. The chair crashed into
him, bowled him over.

"Now do you believe me?" demanded Manning.

Scrambling to his feet, Scorio gibbered madly, for the six-inch figure
was growing. He became as large as the average man, and then much
larger. His head cleared the high ceiling by scant inches. His mighty
hands reached out for the gangster.

Scorio scuttled away on hands and knees, yelping with terror.

Powerful hands seemed to seize and lift him. The room was blotted out.
The Earth was gone. He was in a place where there was nothing. No light,
no heat, no gravitation. For one searing, blasting second he seemed to
be floating in strangely suspended animation. Then with a jolt he became
aware of new surroundings.

He blinked his eyes and looked around. He was in a great laboratory that
hummed faintly with the suggestion of terrific power, that smelled of
ozone and seemed filled with gigantic apparatus.

Two men stood in front of him.

He staggered back.

"Manning!" he gasped.

Manning grinned savagely at him. "Sit down, Scorio. You won't have long
to wait. Your boys will be along any minute now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Chizzy crouched over the controls, his eyes on the navigation chart.
Only the thin screech of parted air disturbed the silence of the ship.
The high scream and the slow, precise snack-snack of cards as Reg and
Max played a game of double solitaire with a cold, emotionless
precision.

The plane was near the stratosphere, well off the traveled air lanes. It
was running without lights, but the cabin bulbs were on, carefully
shielded.

Pete sat in the co-pilot's chair beside Chizzy. His blank,
expressionless eyes stared straight ahead.

"I don't like this job," he complained.

"Why not?" asked Chizzy.

"Page and Manning aren't the kind of guys a fellow had ought to be
fooling around with. They ain't just chumps. You fool with characters
like them and you got trouble."

Chizzy growled at him disgustedly, bent to his controls.

Straight ahead was a thin sliver of a dying Moon that gave barely
enough illumination to make out the great, rugged blocks of the
mountains, like dark, shadowy brush-strokes on a newly started canvas.

Pete shuddered. There was something about the thin, watery moonlight,
and those brush-stroke hills....

"It seems funny up here," he said.

"Hell," growled Chizzy, "you're going soft in your old age."

Silence fell between the two. The snack-snack of the cards continued.

"You ain't got nothing to be afraid of," Chizzy told Pete. "This tub is
the safest place in the world. She's overpowered a dozen times. She can
outfly anything in the air. She's rayproof and bulletproof and
bombproof. Nothing can hurt us."

But Pete wasn't listening. "That moonlight makes a man see things. Funny
things. Like pictures in the night."

"You're balmy," declared Chizzy.

Pete started out of his seat. His voice gurgled in his throat. He
pointed with a shaking finger out into the night.

"Look!" he yelled "Look!"

Chizzy rose out of his seat ... and froze in sudden terror.

Straight ahead of the ship, etched in silvery moon-lines against the
background of the star-sprinkled sky, was a grim and terrible face.

It was as big and hard as a mountain.




_CHAPTER THIRTEEN_


The ship was silent now. Even the whisper of the cards had stopped. Reg
and Max were on their feet, startled by the cries of Pete and Chizzy.

"It's Manning!" shrieked Pete. "He's watching us!"

Chizzy's hand whipped out like a striking snake toward the controls and,
as he grasped them, his face went deathly white. For the controls were
locked! They resisted all the strength he threw against them and the
ship still bore on toward that mocking face that hung above the Earth.

"Do something!" screamed Max. "You damn fool, do something!"

"I can't," moaned Chizzy. "The ship is out of control."

It seemed impossible. That ship was fast and tricky and it had reserve
power far beyond any possible need. It handled like a dream ... it was
tops in aircraft. But there was no doubt that some force more powerful
than the engines and controls of the ship itself had taken over.

"Manning's got us!" squealed Pete. "We came out to get him and now he
has us instead!"

The craft was gaining speed. The whining shriek of the air against its
plates grew thinner and higher. Listening, one could almost feel and
hear the sucking of the mighty power that pulled it at an ever greater
pace through the tenuous atmosphere.

The face was gone from the sky now. Only the Moon remained, the Moon and
the brush-stroke mountains far below.

Then, suddenly, the speed was slowing and the ship glided downward, down
into the saw-teeth of the mountains.

"We're falling!" yelled Max, and Chizzy growled at him.

But they weren't falling. The ship leveled off and floated, suspended
above a sprawling laboratory upon a mountain top.

"That's Manning's laboratory," whispered Pete in terror-stricken tones.

The levers yielded unexpectedly. Chizzy flung the power control over,
drove the power of the accumulator bank, all the reserve, into the
engines. The ship lurched, but did not move. The engines whined and
screamed in torture. The cabin's interior was filled with a blast of
heat, the choking odor of smoke and hot rubber. The heavy girders of the
frame creaked under the mighty forward thrust of the engines ... but the
ship stood still, frozen above that laboratory in the hills.

Chizzy, hauling back the lever, turned around, pale. His hand began
clawing for his heat gun. Then he staggered back. For there were only
two men in the cabin with him--Reg and Max. Pete had gone!

"He just disappeared," Max jabbered. "He was standing there in front of
us. Then all at once he seemed to fade, as if he was turning into smoke.
Then he was gone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Something had descended about Pete. There was no sound, no light, no
heat. He had no sense of weight. It was as if, suddenly, his mind had
become disembodied.

Seeing and hearing and awareness came back to him as one might turn on a
light. From the blackness and the eventless existence of a split second
before, he was catapulted into a world of light and sound.

It was a world that hummed with power, that was ablaze with light, a
laboratory that seemed crammed with mighty banks of massive machinery,
lighted by great globes of creamy brightness, shedding an illumination
white as sunlight, yet shadowless as the light of a cloudy day.

Two men stood in front of him, looking at him, one with a faint smile on
his lips, the other with lines of fear etched across his face. The
smiling one was Gregory Manning and the one who was afraid was Scorio!

With a start, Pete snatched his pistol from its holster. The sights came
up and lined on Manning as he pressed the trigger. But the lancing heat
that sprang from the muzzle of the gun never reached Manning. It seemed
to strike an obstruction less than a foot away. It mushroomed with a
flare of scorching radiance that drove needles of agony into the
gangster's body.

His finger released its pressure and the gun dangled limply from his
hand. He moaned with the pain of burns upon his unprotected face and
hands. He beat feebly at tiny, licking blazes that ran along his
clothing.

Manning was still smiling at him.

"You can't reach me, Pete," he said. "You can only hurt yourself. You're
enclosed within a solid wall of force that matter cannot penetrate."

A voice came from one corner of the room: "I'll bring Chizzy down next."

Pete whirled around and saw Russell Page for the first time. The
scientist sat in front of a great control board, his swift, skillful
fingers playing over the banks of keys, his eyes watching the instrument
and the screen that slanted upward from the control banks.

Pete felt dizzy as he stared at the screen. He could see the interior of
the ship he had been yanked from a moment before. He could see his three
companions, talking excitedly, frightened by his disappearance.

       *       *       *       *       *

His eyes flicked away from the screen, looked up through the skylight
above him. Outlined against the sky hung the ship. At the nose and
stern, two hemispheres of blue-white radiance fitted over the metal
framework, like the jaws of a powerful vise, holding the craft
immovable.

His gaze went back to the screen again, just in time to see Chizzy
disappear. It was as if the man had been a mere figure chalked upon a
board ... and then someone had taken a sponge and wiped him out.

Russ's fingers were flying over the keys. His thumb reached out and
tripped a lever. There was a slight hum of power.

And Chizzy stood beside him.

Chizzy did not pull his gun. He whimpered and cowered within the
invisible cradle of force.

"You're yellow," Pete snarled at him, but Chizzy only covered his eyes
with his arms.

"Look, boss," said Pete, addressing Scorio, "what are you doing here? We
left you back in New York."

Scorio did not answer. He merely glared. Pete lapsed into silence,
watching.

       *       *       *       *       *

Manning stood poised before the captives, rocking back and forth on his
heels.

"A nice bag for one evening," he told Russ.

Russ grinned and stoked up his pipe.

Manning turned to the gangster chief. "What do you think we ought to do
with these fellows? We can't leave them in those force shells too long
because they'll die for lack of air. And we can't let them loose because
they might use their guns on us."

"Listen, Manning," Scorio rasped hoarsely, "just name your price to let
us loose. We'll do anything you want."

Manning drew his mouth down. "I can't think of a thing. We just don't
seem to have any use for you."

"Then what in hell," the gangster asked shakily, "are you going to do
with us?"

"You know," said Manning, "I may be a bit old-fashioned along some
lines. Maybe I am. I just don't like the idea of killing people for
money. I don't like people stealing things other people have worked hard
to get. I don't like thieves and murderers and thugs corrupting city
governments, taking tribute on every man, woman and child in our big
cities."

"But look here, Manning," pleaded Scorio, "we'd be good citizens if we
just had a chance."

Manning's face hardened. "You sent these men here to kill us tonight,
didn't you?"

"Well, not exactly. Stutsman kind of wanted you killed, but I told the
boys just to get the stuff in the safe and never mind killing you. I
said to them that you were pretty good eggs and I didn't like to bump
you off, see?"

"I see," said Manning.

He turned his back on Scorio and started to walk away. The gangster
chief came half-way out of his chair, and as he did so, Russ reached out
a single finger and tapped a key. Scorio screamed and beat with his
fists against the wall of force that had suddenly formed about him. That
single tap on the great keyboard had sprung a trap, had been the one
factor necessary to bring into being a force shell already spun and
waiting for him.

Manning did not even turn around at Scorio's scream. He slowly paced his
way down the line of standing gangsters. He stopped in front of Pete and
looked at him.

"Pete," he said, "you've sprung a good many prisons, haven't you?"

"There ain't a jug in the System that can hold me," Pete boasted, "and
that's a fact."

"I believe there's one that could," Greg told him. "One that no man has
ever escaped from, or ever will."

"What's that?" demanded Pete.

"The Vulcan Fleet," said Greg.

Pete looked into the eyes of the man before him and read the purpose in
those eyes. "Don't send me there! Send me any place but there!"

Greg turned to Russ and nodded. Russ's fingers played their tune of doom
upon the keyboard. His thumb depressed a lever. With a roar five
gigantic material energy engines screamed with thrumming power.

Pete disappeared.

The engines roared with thunderous throats, a roar that seemed to drown
the laboratory in solid waves of sound. A curious refractive effect
developed about the straining hulks as space near them bent under their
lashing power.

Months ago Russ and Greg had learned a better way of transmitting power
than by metal bars or through conducting beams. Beams of such power as
were developing now would have smashed atoms to protons and electrons.
Through a window in the side of the near engine, Greg could see the iron
ingot used as fuel dwindling under the sucking force.

       *       *       *       *       *

The droning died and only a hum remained.

"He's in a prison now he'll never get out of," said Greg calmly. "I
wonder what they'll think when they find him, dressed in civilian
clothes and carrying a heat gun. They'll clap him into a photo-cell and
keep him there until they investigate. When they find out who he is, he
won't get out--he has enough unfinished prison sentences to last a
century or two."

For Pete was on one of the Vulcan Fleet ships, the hell-ships of the
prison fleet. There were confined only the most vicious and the most
depraved of the Solar System's criminals. He would be forced to work
under the flaming whip-lashes of a Sun that hurled such intense
radiations that mere spacesuits were no protection at all. The workers
on the Vulcan Fleet ships wore suits that were in reality photo-cells
which converted the deadly radiations into electric power. For electric
power can be disposed of where heat cannot.

Quailing inside his force shell, Scorio saw his men go, one by one. Saw
them lifted and whisked away, out through the depths of space by the
magic touch upon the keyboards. With terror-widened eyes he watched
Russ set up the equations, saw him trip the activating lever, saw the
men disappear, listened to the thunderous rumbling of the mighty
engines.

Chizzy went to the Outpost, the harsh prison on Neptune's satellite. Reg
went to Titan, clear across the Solar System, where men in the infamous
penal colony labored in the frigid wastes of that moon of Saturn. Max
went to Vesta, the asteroid prison, which long had been the target of
reformers, who claimed that on it 50 per cent of the prisoners died of
boredom and fear.

Max was gone and only Scorio remained.

"Stutsman's the one who got us into this," wailed the gangster. "He's
the man you want to get. Not me. Not the boys. Stutsman."

"I promise you," said Greg, "that we'll take care of Stutsman."

"And Chambers, too," chattered Scorio. "But you can't touch Chambers.
You wouldn't dare."

"We're not worrying about Chambers," Greg told him. "We're not worrying
about anyone. You're the one who had better start doing some."

Scorio cringed.

"Let me tell you about a place on Venus," said Greg. "It's in the center
of a big swamp that stretches for hundreds of miles in every direction.
It's a sort of mountain rising out of the swamp. And the swamp is filled
with beasts and reptiles of every kind. Ravenous things, lusting for
blood. But they don't climb the mountain. A man, if he stayed on the
mountain, would be safe. There's food there. Roots and berries and
fruits and even small animals one could kill. A man might go hungry for
a while, but soon he'd find the things to eat.

"But he'd be alone. No one ever goes near that mountain. I am the only
man who ever set foot on it. Perhaps no one ever will again. At night
you hear the screaming and the crying of the things down in swamp, but
you mustn't pay any attention to them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Scorio's eyes widened, staring. "You won't send me _there_!"

"You'll find my campfires," Greg told him, "if the rain hasn't washed
them away. It rains a lot. So much and so drearily that you'll want to
leave that mountain and walk down into the swamp, of your own free will,
and let the monsters finish you."

Scorio sat dully. He did not move. Horror glazed his eyes.

Greg signed to Russ. Russ, pipe clenched between his teeth, reached out
his fingers for the keys. The engines droned.

Manning walked slowly to a television control, sat down in the chair
and flipped over a lever. A face stared out of the screen. It was
strangely filled with anger and a sort of half-fear.

"You watched it, didn't you, Stutsman?" Greg asked.

Stutsman nodded. "I watched. You can't get away with it, Manning. You
can't take the law into your own hands that way."

"You and Chambers have been taking the law into your hands for years,"
said Greg. "All I did tonight was clear the Earth of some vermin. Every
one of those men was guilty of murder ... and worse."

"What did you gain by it?" asked Stutsman.

Greg gave a bitter laugh. "I convinced you, Stutsman," he said, "that it
isn't so easy to kill me. I think it'll be some time before you try
again. Better luck next time."

He flipped the switch and turned about in the chair.

Russ jerked his thumb at the skylight. "Might as well finish the ship
now."

Greg nodded.

An instant later there was a fierce, intolerably blue-white light that
lit the mountains for many miles. For just an instant it flared,
exploding into millions of brilliant, harmless sparks that died into
darkness before they touched the ground. The gangster ship was destroyed
beyond all tracing, disintegrated. The metal and quartz of which it was
made were simply gone.

Russ brought his glance back from the skylight, looked at his friend.
"Stutsman will do everything he can to wipe us out. By tomorrow morning
the Interplanetary machine will be rolling. With only one purpose--to
crush us."

"That's right," Greg agreed, "but we're ready for them now. Our ship
left the Belgium factories several hours ago. The _Comet_ towed it out
in space and it's waiting for us now. In a few hours the _Comet_ will be
here to pick us up."

"War in space," said Russ, musingly. "That's what it will be."

"Chambers and his gang won't fight according to any rules. There'll be
no holds barred, no more feeble attempts like the one they tried
tonight. From now on we need a base that simply can't be located."

"The ship," said Russ.




_CHAPTER FOURTEEN_


The _Invincible_ hung in space, an empty, airless hull, the largest
thing afloat.

Chartered freighters, leaving their ports from distant parts of the
Earth, had converged upon her hours before, had unloaded crated
apparatus, storing it in the yawning hull. Then they had departed.

Now the sturdy little space-yacht, _Comet_, was towing the great ship
out into space, 500,000 miles beyond the orbit of the Moon. Slowly the
hull was being taken farther and farther away from possible discovery.

Work on the installation of the apparatus had started almost as soon as
the _Comet_ had first tugged at the ponderous mass. Leaving only a
skeleton crew in charge of the _Comet_, the rest of the selected crew
had begun the assembly of the mighty machines which would transform the
_Invincible_ into a thing of unimaginable power and speed.

The doors were closed and sealed and the air, already stored in the
ship's tanks, was released. The slight acceleration of the _Comet's_
towing served to create artificial weight for easier work, but not
enough to handicap the shifting of the heavier pieces of apparatus. An
electric cable was run back from the little yacht and the _Invincible_
took her first breath of life.

The work advanced rapidly, for every man was more than a mere engineer
or spacebuster. They were a selected crew, the men who had helped to
make the name of Gregory Manning famous throughout the Solar System.

First the engines were installed, then the two groups of five massive
power plants and the single smaller engine as an auxiliary supply plant
for the light, heat, air.

The accumulators of the _Comet_ were drained in a single tremendous
surge and the auxiliary generator started. It in turn awoke to life the
other power plants, to leave them sleeping, idling, but ready for
instant use to develop power such as man never before had dreamed of
holding and molding to his will.

Then, with the gigantic tools these engines supplied ... tools of pure
force and strange space fields ... the work was rapidly completed. The
power boards were set in place, welded in position by a sudden furious
blast of white hot metal and as equally sudden freezing, to be followed
by careful heating and recooling till the beryl-steel reached its
maximum strength. Over the hull swarmed spacesuited men, using that
strange new power, heat-treating the stubborn metal in a manner never
before possible.

The generators were charging the atoms of the ship's beryl-steel hide
with the same hazy force that had trapped and held the gangster ship in
a mighty vise. Thus charged, no material thing could penetrate them. The
greatest meteor would be crushed to drifting dust without so much as
scarring that wall of mighty force ... meteors traveling with a speed
and penetrative power that no gun-hurled projectile could ever hope to
attain.

Riding under her own power, driven by the concentration of gravitational
lines, impregnable to all known forces, containing within her hull the
secrets of many strange devices, the _Invincible_ wheeled in space.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russell Page lounged in a chair before the control manual of the
tele-transport machine. He puffed placidly at his pipe and looked out
through the great sweep of the vision panel. Out there was the black of
space and the glint of stars, the soft glow of distant Jupiter.

Greg Manning was hunched over the navigation controls, sharp eyes
watching the panorama of space.

Russ looked at him and grinned. On Greg's face there was a smile, but
about his eyes were lines of alert watchfulness and thought. Greg
Manning was in his proper role at the controls of a ship such as the
_Invincible_, a man who never stepped backward from danger, whose spirit
hungered for the vast stretches of void that lay between the worlds.

Russ leaned back, blowing smoke toward the high-arched control room
ceiling.

They had burned their bridges behind them. The laboratory back in the
mountains was destroyed. Locked against any possible attack by a sphere
of force until the tele-transport had lifted from it certain items of
equipment, it had been melted into a mass of molten metal that formed a
pool upon the mountain top, that ran in gushing, fiery ribbons down the
mountain side, flowing in gleaming curtains over precipices. It would
have been easier to have merely disintegrated in one bursting flash of
energy, but that would have torn apart the entire mountain range,
overwhelmed and toppled cities hundreds of miles away, dealt Earth a
staggering blow.

A skeleton crew had taken the _Comet_ back to Earth and landed it on
Greg's estate. Once again the tele-transport had reached out, wrapped
its fingers around the men who stepped from the little ship. In less
than the flash of a strobe light, they had been snatched back to the
_Invincible_, through a million miles of space, through the very walls
of the ship itself. One second they had been on Earth, the next second
they were in the control room of the _Invincible_, grinning, saluting
Greg Manning, trotting back to their quarters in the engine rooms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ stared out at space, puffed at his pipe, considering.

A thousand years ago men had held what they called tournaments. Armored
knights rode out into the jousting grounds and broke their lances to
prove which was the better man. Today there was to be another
tournament. This ship was to be their charger, and the gauntlet had been
flung to Spencer Chambers and Interplanetary Power. And all of space was
to be the jousting grounds.

This was war. War without trappings, without fanfare, but bitter war
upon which depended the future of the Solar System. A war to break the
grip of steel that Interplanetary accumulators had gained upon the
planets, to shatter the grim dream of empire held by one man, a war for
the right to give to the people of the worlds a source of power that
would forever unshackle them.

Back in those days, a thousand years ago, men had built a system of
government that historians called the feudal system. By this system
certain men were called lords or barons and other titles. They held the
power of life and death over the men "under" them.

This was what Spencer Chambers was trying to do with the Solar
System ... what he would do if someone did not stop him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ bit viciously on his pipe-stem.

The Earth, the Solar System, never could revert to that ancient way of
government. The proud people spawned on the Earth, swarming outward to
the other planets, must never have to bow their heads as minions to an
overlord.

The thrum of power was beating in his brain, the droning, humming power
from the engine rooms that would blast, once and forever, the last
threat of dictatorship upon any world. The power that would free a
people, that would help them on and up and outward to the great destiny
that was theirs.

And this had come because, wondering, groping, curiously, he had sought
to heat a slender thread of imperm wire within Force Field 348, because
another man had listened and had made available his fortune to continue
the experiments. Blind luck and human curiosity ... perhaps even the
madness of a human dream ... and from those things had come this great
ship, this mighty power, these many bulking pieces of equipment that
would perform wonders never guessed at less than a year ago.

Greg Manning swiveled his chair. "Well, Russ, we're ready to begin.
Let's get Wrail first."

Russ nodded silently, his mind still half full of fleeting thought.
Absent-mindedly he knocked out his pipe and pocketed it, swung around to
the manual of the televisor. His fingers reached out and tapped a
pattern.

Callisto appeared within the screen, leaped upward at them. Then the
surface of the frozen little world seemed to rotate swiftly and a dome
appeared.

The televisor dived through the dome, sped through the city, straight
for a penthouse apartment.

Ben Wrail sat slumped in a chair. A newspaper was crumpled at his feet.
In his lap lay a mangled dead cigar.

"Greg!" yelled Russ. "Greg, there's something wrong!"

Greg leaped forward, stared at the screen. Russ heard his smothered cry
of rage.

In Wrail's forehead was a tiny, neatly drilled hole from which a single
drop of blood oozed.

"Murdered!" exclaimed Russ.

"Yes, murdered," said Greg, and there was a sudden calmness in his
voice.

Russ grasped the televisor control. Ranthoor's streets ran beneath them,
curiously silent and deserted. Here and there lay bodies. A few shop
windows were smashed. But the only living that stirred was a dog that
slunk across the street and into the shadows of an alley.

Swiftly the televisor swung along the streets. Straight into the screen
clanked a marching detail of government police, herding before them a
half dozen prisoners. The men had their hands bound behind their backs,
but they walked with heads held high.

"Revolution," gasped Russ.

"Not a revolution. A purge. Stutsman is clearing the city of all who
might be dangerous to him. This will be happening on every other planet
where Chambers holds control."

Perspiration ran down Russ's forehead and dripped into his eyes as he
manipulated the controls.

"Stutsman is striking first," said Greg, calmly ... far too calmly.
"He's consolidating his position, possibly on the pretense that plots
have been discovered."

A few buildings were bombed. A line of bodies were crumpled at the foot
of a steel wall, marking the spot where men had been lined up and mowed
down with one sweeping blast from a heater.

Russ turned the television controls. "Let's see about Venus and Mars."

The scenes in Ranthoor were duplicated in Sandebar on Mars, in New
Chicago, the capital of Venus. Everywhere Stutsman had struck ...
everywhere the purge was wiping out in blood every person who might
revolt against the Chambers-dictated governments. Throughout the Solar
System violence was on the march, iron-shod boots trampling the rights
of free men to tighten the grip of Interplanetary.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the control room of the _Invincible_ the two men stared at one
another.

"There's one man we need," said Greg. "One man, if he's still alive, and
I think he is."

"Who is that?" asked Russ.

"John Moore Mallory," said Greg.

"Where is he?"

"I don't know. He was imprisoned in Ranthoor, but Stutsman transferred
him some place else. Possibly to one of the prison fleet."

"If we had the records of the Callisto prison," suggested Russ, "we
could find out."

"If we had the records ..."

"We'll get them!" Russ said.

He swung back to the keyboard again.

A moment later the administration offices of the prison were on the
screen.

The two men searched the vision plate.

"The records are most likely in that vault," said Russ. "And the vault
is locked."

"Don't worry about the lock," snapped Greg. "Just bring the whole damn
thing here--vault and records and all."

Russ nodded grimly. His thumb tripped the tele-transport control and
from the engine rooms came a drone of power. In Ranthoor Prison, great
bands of force wrapped themselves around the vault, clutching it,
enfolding it within a sphere of power. Back in the _Invincible_ the
engines screamed and the vault was ripped out of the solid steel wall as
easily as a man might rip a button from his shirt.




_CHAPTER FIFTEEN_


John Moore Mallory sat on the single metal chair within his cell and
pressed his face against the tiny vision port. For hours he had sat
there, staring out into the blackness of space.

There was bitterness in John Moore Mallory's soul, a terrible and futile
bitterness. So long as he had remained within the Ranthoor prison, there
had always been a chance of escape. But now, aboard the penal ship,
there was no hope. Nothing but the taunting reaches of space, the
mocking pinpoints of the stars, the hooting laughter of the engines.

Sometimes he had thought he would go mad. The everlasting routine, the
meaningless march of hours. The work period, the sleep period ... the
work period, the sleep period ... endless monotony, an existence without
a purpose. Men buried alive in space.

"John Moore Mallory," said a voice.

Mallory heard, but he did not stir. An awful thought crossed his mind.
Now he was hearing voices calling his name!

"John Mallory," said the voice again.

Mallory slowly turned about and as he turned he started from his chair.

A man stood in the cell! A man he had never seen before, who had come
silently, for there had been no screech of opening door.

"You are John Moore Mallory, aren't you?" asked the man.

"Yes, I am Mallory. Who are you?"

"Gregory Manning."

"Gregory Manning," said Mallory wonderingly. "I've heard of you. You're
the man who rescued the Pluto Expedition. But why are you here? How did
you get in?"

"I came to take you away with me," said Greg. "Back to Callisto. Back to
any place you want to go."

Mallory flattened himself against the partition, his face white with
disbelief. "But I'm in a prison ship. I'm not free to go and come as I
please."

Greg chuckled. "You are free to go and come as you please from now on,"
he said. "Even prison ships can't hold you."

"You're mad," whispered Mallory. "Either you're mad or I am. You're a
dream. I'll wake up and find you gone."

Manning stood in silence, looking at the man. Mallory bore the marks of
prison on him. His eyes were haunted and his rugged face was pinched and
thin.

"Listen closely, Mallory," said Greg softly. "You aren't going mad and
I'm not mad. You aren't seeing things. You aren't hearing things. You're
actually talking to me."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no change in the other's face.

"Mallory," Greg went on, "I have what you've always needed--means of
generating almost unlimited energy at almost no cost, the secret of the
energy of matter. A secret that will smash Interplanetary, that will
free the Solar System from Spencer Chambers. But I can't make that
secret available to the people until Chambers is crushed, until I'm sure
that he can't take it from me. And to do that I need your help."

Mallory's face lost its expression of bewilderment, suddenly lighted
with realization. But his voice was harsh and bitter.

"You came too late. I can't help you. Remember, I'm in a prison ship
from which no one can escape. You have to do what you can ... you must
do what you can. But I can't be with you."

Manning strode forward. "You don't get the idea at all. I said I'd get
you out of here and I'm going to. I could pick up this ship and put it
wherever I wanted. But I don't want to. I just want you."

Mallory stared at him.

"Just don't be startled," said Greg. "Something will happen soon. Get
ready for it."

Feet drummed on the metal corridor outside.

"Hey, you, pipe down!" yelled the voice of the guard. "You know there's
no talking allowed now. Go to sleep."

"That's the guard," Mallory whispered fiercely. "They'll stop us."

Greg grinned viciously. "No, they won't."

       *       *       *       *       *

The guard came into view through the grilled door.

"So it's you, Mallory ..." he began, stopping in amazement. "Hey, you!"
he shouted at Greg. "Who are you? How did you get in that cell?"

Greg flipped a hand in greeting. "Pleasant evening, isn't it?"

The guard grabbed for the door, but he did not reach the bars. Some
force stopped him six inches away. It could not be seen, could not be
felt, but his straining against it accomplished nothing.

"Mallory and I are leaving," Greg told the guard. "We don't like it
here. Too stuffy."

The guard lifted a whistle and blew a blast. Feet pounded outside. A
prisoner yelled from one of the cells. Another catcalled. Instantly the
ship was in an uproar. The convicts took up the yammering, shaking the
bars on their doors.

"Let's get started," Greg said to Mallory. "Hold tight."

Blackness engulfed Mallory. He felt a peculiar twisting wrench. And then
he was standing in the control room of a ship and Gregory Manning and
another man were smiling at him. White light poured down from a cluster
of globes. Somewhere in the ship engines purred with the hum of power.
The air was fresh and pure, making him realize how foul and stale the
air of the prison ship had been.

Greg held out his hand. "Welcome to our ship."

Mallory gripped his hand, blinking in the light. "Where am I?"

"You are on the _Invincible_, five million miles off Callisto."

"But were you here all the time?" asked Mallory. "Were you in my cell
back there or weren't you?"

"I was really in your cell," Greg assured him. "I could have just thrown
my image there, but I went there personally to get you. Russ Page, here,
sent me out. When I gave him the signal, he brought both of us back."

"I'm glad you're with us," Russ said. "Perhaps you'd like a cup of
coffee, something to eat."

Mallory stammered. "Why, I really would." He laughed. "Rations weren't
too good in the prison ship."

They sat down while Russ rang the galley for coffee and sandwiches.

Crisply, Greg informed Mallory of the situation.

"We want to start manufacturing these engines as soon as possible," he
explained, "but I haven't even dared to patent them. Chambers would
simply buy out the officials if I tried it on Earth, delay the patent
for a few days and then send through papers copied from ours. You know
what he'd do with it if he got the patent rights. He'd scrap it and the
old accumulator business would go on as always. If I tried it on any
other world, with any other government, he'd see that laws were passed
to block us. He'd probably instruct the courts to rule against the
manufacture of the engines on the grounds that they were dangerous."

Mallory's face was grave. "There's only one answer," he said. "With the
situation on the worlds, with this purge you told me about, there's only
one thing to do. We have to act at once. Every minute we wait gives
Stutsman just that much longer to tighten his hold."

"And that answer?" asked Russ.

"Revolution," said Mallory. "Simultaneous revolution in the Jovian
confederacy, on Mars and Venus. Once free, the planets will stay free
with your material energy engines. Spencer Chambers and his idea of
Solar System domination will be too late."

       *       *       *       *       *

Greg's forehead was wrinkled in thought, his facial muscles tensed.

"First thing to do," he said, "is to contact all the men we can find ...
men we can rely on to help us carry out our plans. We'll need more
televisor machines, more teleport machines, some for use on Mars and
Venus, others for the Jovian moons. We will have to bring the men here
to learn to operate them. It'll take a few days. We'll get some men to
work on new machines right away."

He started to rise from his chair, but at that moment the coffee and
sandwiches arrived.

Greg grinned. "We may as well eat first."

Mallory looked grateful and tried to keep from wolfing the food. The
others pretended not to notice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grim hours followed, an unrelenting search over two planets and four
moons for men whom Mallory considered loyal to his cause--men willing to
risk their lives to throw off the yoke of Interplanetary.

They were hard to find. Many of them were dead, victims of the purge.
The others were in hiding and word of them was difficult to get.

But slowly, one by one, they were ferreted out, the plan explained to
them, and then, by means of the tele-transport, they were brought to the
_Invincible_.

Hour after hour men worked, stripped to their waists, in the glaring
inferno of terrible force fields, fashioning new television units. As
fast as the sets were constructed, they were placed in operation.

The work went faster than could be expected, yet it was maddeningly
slow.

For with the passing of each hour, Stutsman clamped tighter his iron
grip on the planets. Concentration camps were filled to overflowing.
Buildings were bombed and burned. Murders and executions were becoming
too common to be news.

Then suddenly there was a new development.

"Greg, Craven has found something!" Russ cried. "I can't get him!"

Supervising the installation of a new televisor set, Greg spun around.
"What's that?"

"Craven! I can't reach him. He's blocking me out!"

Greg helped, but the apparatus was unable to enter the Interplanetary
building in New York. Certain other portions of the city adjacent to the
building also were blanketed out. In all the Solar System, the
Interplanetary building was the only place they could not enter, except
the Sun itself.

Craven had developed a field from which their field shied off. The
televisor seemed to roll off it like a drop of mercury. That definitely
ended all spying on Craven and Chambers.

Russ mopped his brow, sucked at his dead pipe.

"Light penetrates it," he said. "Matter penetrates it, electricity, all
ordinary forces. But this field won't. It's ... well, whatever Craven
has is similarly dissimilar. The same thing of opposite nature. It
repels our field, but doesn't affect anything else. That means he has
analyzed our fields. We have Wilson to thank for this."

Greg nodded gravely. "There's just one thing to be thankful for," he
declared. "He probably isn't any nearer our energy than he was before.
But now we can't watch him. And that field of his shows that he has
tremendous power of some sort."

"We can't watch him, but we can follow him," corrected Russ. "He can't
shake us. None of them can. The mechanical shadow will take care of
that. I have one for Craven with a bit of 'bait' off his spectacles and
he'll keep those spectacles, never fear. He's blind as a bat without
them. And we can track Chambers with his ring."

"That's right," agreed Greg, "but we've got to speed up. Craven is
getting under way now. If he does this, he can do something else.
Something that will really hurt us. The man's clever ... too damn
clever."




_CHAPTER SIXTEEN_


A miracle came to pass in Ranthoor when a man for whom all hope had been
abandoned suddenly appeared within the city's streets. But he appeared
to be something not quite earthly, for he did not have the solidity of a
man. He was pale, like a wraith from out of space, and one could see
straight through him, yet he still had all the old mannerisms and
tricks.

In frightened, awe-stricken whispers the word was spread ... the spirit
of John Moore Mallory had come back to the city once again. He bulked
four times the height of a normal man and there was that singular
ghostliness about him. From where he had come, or how, or why, no one
seemed to know.

But when he reached the steps of the federation's administration
building and walked straight through a line of troopers that suddenly
massed to bar his way, and when he turned on those steps and spoke to
the people who had gathered, there was none to doubt that at last a sign
had come. The sign that now, if ever, was the time to avenge the purge.
Now the time to take vengeance for the blood that flowed in gutters, for
the throaty chortling of the flame guns that had snuffed out lives
against a broad steel wall.

Standing on the steps, shadowy but plainly visible, John Moore Mallory
talked to the people in the square below, and his voice was the voice
they remembered. They saw him toss his black mane of hair, they saw his
clenched fist raised in terrible anger, they heard the boom of the words
he spoke.

Like a shrilling alarm the words spread through the city, reverberating
from the dome, seeking out those who were in hiding. From every corner
of the city, from its deepest cellars and its darkest alleys, poured out
a mass of humanity that surrounded the capitol and blackened the square
and the converging streets with a mob that shrieked its hatred, bellowed
its anger.

"Power!" thundered the mighty shadow on the steps. "Power to burn! Power
to give away. Power to heat the dome, to work your mines, to drive your
spaceships!"

"Power!" answered the voice of the crowd. "Power!" It sounded like a
battle cry.

"No more accumulators," roared the towering image. "Never again need you
rely on Spencer Chambers for your power. Callisto is yours. Ranthoor is
yours."

The black crowd surged forward, reached the steps and started to climb,
wild cheers in their throat, the madness of victory in their eyes. Up
the steps came men with nothing but bare hands, screaming women, jeering
children.

Officers snapped orders at the troops that lined the steps, but the
troopers, staring into the awful, raging maw of that oncoming crowd,
dropped their guns and fled, back into the capitol building, with the
mob behind them, shrilling blood lust and long-awaited vengeance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Out of the red and yellow wilderness of the deserts, a man came to
Sandebar on Mars. He had long been thought dead. The minions of the
government had announced that he was dead. But he had been in hiding for
six years.

His beard was long and gray, his eyes were curtained by hardship, his
white hair hung about his shoulders and he was clothed in the tattered
leather trappings of the spaceways.

But men remembered him.

Tom Brown had lead the last revolt against the Martian government, an
ill-starred revolt that ended almost before it started when the
troopers turned loose the heavy heaters and swept the streets with
washing waves of flame.

When he climbed to the base of a statue in Techor Park to address the
crowd that gathered, the police shouted for him to come down and he
disregarded them. They climbed the statue to reach him and their hands
went through him.

Tom Brown stood before the people, in plain view, and spoke, but he
wasn't there!

Other things happened in Sandebar that day. A voice spoke out of thin
air, a voice that told the people the reign of Interplanetary was over.
It told of a mighty new source of power. Power that would cost almost
nothing. Power that would make the accumulators unnecessary ... would
make them out of date. A voice that said the people need no longer
submit to the yoke of Spencer Chambers' government in order to obtain
the power they needed.

There was no one there ... no one visible at all. And yet that voice
went on and on. A great crowd gathered, listening, cheering. The police
tried to break it up and failed. The troops were ordered out and the
people fought them until the voice told them to disband peaceably and go
to their homes.

Throughout Mars it was the same.

In a dozen places in Sandebar the voice spoke. It spoke in a dozen
places, out of empty air, in Malacon and Alexon and Adebron.

Tom Brown, vanishing into the air after his speech was done, reappeared
a few minutes later in Adebron and there the police, warned of what had
happened in Sandebar, opened fire upon him when he stood on a park bench
to address the people. But the flames passed through and did not touch
him. Tom Brown, his long white beard covering his chest, his mad eyes
flashing, stood in the fiery blast that bellowed from the muzzles of the
flame rifles and calmly talked.

       *       *       *       *       *

The chief of police at New Chicago, Venus, called the police
commissioner. "There's a guy out here in the park, just across the
street. He's preaching treason. He's telling the people to overthrow the
government."

In the ground glass the police commissioner's face grew purple.

"Arrest him," he ordered the chief. "Clap him in the jug. Do you have to
call me up every time one of those fiery-eyed boys climbs a soap box?
Run him in."

"I can't," said the chief.

The police commissioner seemed ready to explode. "You can't? Why the
hell not?"

"Well, you know that hill in the center of the park? Memorial Hill?"

"What has a hill got to do with it?" the commissioner roared.

"He's sitting on top of that hill. He's a thousand feet tall. His head
is way up in the sky and his voice is like thunder. How can you arrest
anybody like that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Everywhere in the System, revolt was flaming. New marching songs rolled
out between the worlds, wild marching songs that had the note of anger
in them. Weapons were brought out of hiding and polished. New standards
were raised in an ever-rising tide against oppression.

Freedom was on the march again. The right of a man to rule himself the
way he chose to rule. A new declaration of independence. A Solar Magna
Carta.

There were new leaders, led by the old leaders. Led by spirits that
marched across the sky. Led by voices that spoke out of the air. Led by
signs and symbols and a new-born courage and a great and a deep
conviction that right in the end would triumph.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spencer Chambers glared at Ludwig Stutsman. "This is one time you went
too far."

"If you'd given me a free hand before, this wouldn't have been
necessary," Stutsman said. "But you were soft. You made me go easy when
I should have ground them down. You left the way open for all sorts of
plots and schemes and leaders to develop."

The two men faced one another, one the smooth, tawny lion, the other the
snarling wolf.

"You've built up hatred, Stutsman," Chambers said. "You are the most
hated man in the Solar System. And because of you, they hate me. That
wasn't my idea. I needed you because I needed an iron fist, but I needed
it to use judiciously. And you have been ruthless. You've used force
when conciliation was necessary."

Stutsman sneered openly. "Still that old dream of a benevolent
dictatorship. Still figuring yourself a little bronze god to be set up
in every household. A dictatorship can't be run that way. You have to
let them know you're boss."

Chambers was calm again. "Argument won't do us any good now. The damage
is done. Revolt is flaming through all the worlds. We have to do
something."

He looked at Craven, who was slouched in a chair beside the desk across
which he and Stutsman faced each other.

"Can you help us, doctor?" he asked.

Craven shrugged. "Perhaps," he said acidly. "If I could only be left to
my work undisturbed, instead of being dragged into these stupid
conferences, I might be able to do something."

"You already have, haven't you?" asked Chambers.

"Very little. I've been able to blank out the televisor that Manning and
Page are using, but that is all."

"Do you have any idea where Manning and Page are?"

"How could I know?" Craven asked. "Somewhere in space."

"They're at the bottom of this," snarled Stutsman. "Their damned tricks
and propaganda."

"We know they're at the bottom of it," said Craven. "That's no news to
us. If it weren't for them, we wouldn't have this trouble now, despite
your bungling. But that doesn't help us any. With this new discovery of
mine I have shielded this building from their observation. They can't
spy on us any more. But that's as far as I've got."

"They televised the secret meeting of the emergency council when it met
in Satellite City on Ganymede the other day," said Chambers. "The whole
Jovian confederacy watched and listened to that meeting, heard our
secret war plans, for fully ten minutes before the trick was discovered.
Couldn't we use your shield to prevent such a situation again?"

"Better still," suggested Stutsman, "let's shield the whole satellite.
Without Manning's ghostly leaders, this revolt would collapse of its own
weight."

Craven shook his head. "It takes fifty tons of accumulators to build up
that field, and a ton of fuel a day to maintain it. Just for this
building alone. It would be impossible to shield a whole planet, an
entire moon."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Any progress on your collector field?" asked Chambers.

"Some," Craven admitted. "I'll know in a day or two."

"That would give us something with which to fight Manning and Page,
wouldn't it?"

"Yes," agreed Craven. "It would be something to fight them with. If I
can develop that collector field, we would be able to utilize every
radiation in space, from the heat wave down through the cosmics. Within
the Solar System, our power would be absolutely limitless. Your
accumulators depend for their power storage upon just one radiation ...
heat. But with this idea I have you'd use all types of radiations."

"You say you could even put the cosmics to work?" asked Chambers.

Craven nodded. "If I can do anything at all with the field, I can."

"How?" demanded Stutsman.

"By breaking them up, you fool. Smash the short, high-powered waves into
a lot of longer, lower-powered waves." Craven swung back to face
Chambers. "But don't count on it," he warned. "I haven't done it yet."

"You have to do it," Chambers insisted.

Craven rose from his chair, his blue eyes blazing angrily behind the
heavy lenses. "How often must I tell you that you cannot hurry
scientific investigation? You have to try and try ... follow one tiny
clue to another tiny clue. You have to be patient. You have to hope. But
you cannot force the work."

He strode from the room, slammed the door behind him.

Chambers turned slowly in his chair to face Stutsman. His gray eyes
bored into the wolfish face.

"And now," he suggested, "suppose you tell me just why you did it."

Stutsman's lips curled. "I suppose you would rather I had allowed those
troublemakers to go ahead, consolidate their plans. There was only one
thing to do--root them out, liquidate them. I did it."

"You chose a poor time," said Chambers softly. "You would have to do
something like this, just at the time when Manning is lurking around the
Solar System somewhere, carrying enough power to wipe us off the face of
the Earth if he wanted to."

"That's why I did it," protested Stutsman. "I knew Manning was around. I
was afraid he'd start something, so I beat him to it. I thought it would
throw a scare into the people, make them afraid to follow Manning when
he acted."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You have a low opinion of the human race, don't you?" Chambers said.
"You think you can beat them into a mire of helplessness and fear."

Chambers rose from his chair, pounded his desk for emphasis.

"But you can't do it, Stutsman. Men have tried it before you, from the
very dawn of history. You can destroy their homes and kill their
children. You can burn them at the stake or in the electric chair, hang
them or space-walk them or herd them into gas chambers. You can drive
them like cattle into concentration camps, you can keep the torture
racks bloody, but you can't break them.

"Because the people always survive. Their courage is greater than the
courage of any one man or group of men. They always reach the man who
has oppressed them, they always tear him down from the place he sits,
and they do not deal gently with him when they do. In the end the
people always win."

Chambers reached across the desk and caught Stutsman by the slack of the
shirt. A twist of his hand tightened the fabric around Stutsman's neck.
The financier thrust his face close to the wolfish scowl. "That is what
is going to happen to you and me. We'll go down in history as just a
couple of damn fools who tried to rule and couldn't make the grade.
Thanks to you and your damned stupidity. You and your blood purges!"

Patches of anger burned on Stutsman's cheeks. His eyes glittered and his
lips were white. But his whisper was bitter mockery. "Maybe we should
have coddled and humored them. Made them just so awful happy that big
bad old Interplanetary had them. So they could have set up little bronze
images of you in their homes. So you could have been sort of a solar
god!"

"I still think it would have been the better way." Chambers flung
Stutsman from him with a straight-armed push. The man reeled and
staggered across the carpeted floor. "Get out of my sight!"

Stutsman straightened his shirt, turned and left.

Chambers slumped into his chair, his hands grasping the arms on either
side of his great body, his eyes staring out through the window from
which flooded the last rays of the afternoon Sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Drums pounded in his brain ... the drums of rebellion out in space, of
rebellion on those other worlds ... drums that were drowning out and
shattering forever the dream that he had woven. He had wanted economic
dictatorship ... not the cold, passionless, terrible dictatorship that
Stutsman typified ... but one that would bring peace and prosperity and
happiness to the Solar System.

He closed his eyes and thought. Snatches of ambition, snatches of
hopes ... but it was useless to think, for the drums and the imagined
shouting drowned out his thoughts.

Mankind didn't give a damn for good business administration, nor a hoot
for prosperity or peace or happiness. Liberty and the right to rule, the
right to go risk one's neck ... to climb a mountain or cross a desert or
explore a swamp, the right to aim one's sights at distant stars, to
fling a taunting challenge into the teeth of space, to probe with clumsy
fingers and force nature to lay bare her secrets ... that was what
mankind wanted. That was what those men out on Mars and Venus and in
the Jovian worlds were fighting for. Not against Spencer Chambers or
Ludwig Stutsman or Interplanetary Power, but for the thing that drove
man on and made of him a flame that others might follow. Fighting for a
heritage that was first expressed when the first man growled at the
entrance to his cave and dared the world to take it from him.

Spencer Chambers closed his eyes and rocked back and forth in the
tilting office chair.

It had been a good fight, a hard fight. He had had a lot of fun out of
it. But he was licked, after all these years. He had held the biggest
dream of any man who ever lived. Alexander and Napoleon, Hitler, Stalin
and those other fellows had been pikers alongside of Spencer Chambers.
They had only aimed at Earthly conquest while he had reached out to grab
at all the worlds. But by heaven, he'd almost made it!

A door grated open.

"Chambers!" said a voice.

His feet hit the floor with a thud and he sat stiff and staring at the
figure in the door.

It was Craven and the man was excited. His glasses were slid far down on
his nose, his hair was standing on end, his tie was all awry.

"I have it!" Craven whooped. "I have it at last!"

Hope clutched at Chambers, but he was almost afraid to speak.

"Have what?" he whispered tensely.

"The collector field! It was under my nose all the time, but I didn't
see it!"

Chambers was out of his chair and striding across the room. A tumult
buzzed within his skull.

Licked? Hell, he hadn't even started! He'd win yet. He'd teach the
people to revolt! He'd run Manning and Page out to the end of space and
push them through!




_CHAPTER SEVENTEEN_


It was a weird revolution. There were few battles, little blood shed.
There seemed to be no secret plots. There were no skulking leaders, no
passwords, nothing that in former years had marked rebellion against
tyranny.

It was a revolution carried out with utter boldness. Secret police were
helpless, for it was not a secret revolution. The regular police and the
troopers were helpless because the men they wanted to arrest were
shadows that flitter here and there ... large and substantial shadows,
but impossible to seize and imprison.

Every scheme that was hatched within the government circles was known
almost at once to the ghostly leaders who stalked the land. Police
detachments, armed with warrants for the arrests of men who had
participated in some action which would stamp them as active rebels,
found the suspects absent when they broke down the doors. Someone had
warned them. Troops, hurried to points where riots had broken out,
arrived to find peaceful scenes, but with evidence of recent battle. The
rioters had been warned, had made their getaway.

When the rebels struck it was always at the most opportune time, when
the government was off balance or off guard.

In the first day of the revolt, Ranthoor fell when the maddened
populace, urged on by the words of a shadowy John Moore Mallory, charged
the federation buildings. The government fled, leaving all records
behind, to Satellite City on Ganymede.

In the first week three Martian cities fell, but Sandebar, the capital,
still held out. On Venus, Radium City was taken by the rebels within
twenty-four hours after the first call to revolt had rung across the
worlds, but New Chicago, the seat of government, still was in the
government's hands, facing a siege.

Government propagandists spread the word that the material energy
engines were not safe. Reports were broadcast that on at least two
occasions the engines had blown up, killing the men who operated them.

But this propaganda failed to gain credence, for in the cities that were
in the rebel hands, technicians were at work manufacturing and setting
up the material engines. Demonstrations were given. The people saw them,
saw what enormous power they developed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ Page stared incredulously at the television screen. It seemed to be
shifting back and forth. One second it held the distorted view of
Satellite City on Ganymede, and the next second the view of jumbled, icy
desert somewhere outside the city.

"Look here, Greg," he said. "Something's wrong."

Greg Manning turned away from the calculator where he had been working
and stared at the screen.

"How long has it been acting that way?" he asked.

"Just started," said Russ.

Greg straightened and glanced down the row of television machines. Some
of them were dead, their switches closed, but on the screens of many of
the others was the same effect as on this machine. Their operators were
working frustratedly at the controls, trying to focus the image, bring
it into sharp relief.

"Can't seem to get a thing, sir," said one of the men. "I was working on
the fueling station out on Io, and the screen just went haywire."

"Mine seems to be all right," said another man. "I've had it on Sandebar
for the last couple of hours and there's nothing wrong."

A swift check revealed one fact. The machines, when trained on the
Jovian worlds, refused to function. Anywhere else in space, however,
they worked perfectly.

Russ stoked and lit his pipe, snapped off his machine and swung around
in the operator's chair.

"Somebody's playing hell with us out around Jupiter," he stated calmly.

"I've been expecting something like this," said Greg. "I have been
afraid of this ever since Craven blanketed us out of the Interplanetary
building."

       *       *       *       *       *

"He really must have something this time," Russ agreed. "He's blanketing
out the entire Jovian system. There's a space field of low intensity
surrounding all of Jupiter, enclosing all the moons. He keeps shifting
the intensity so that, even though we can force our way through his
field, the irregular variations make it impossible to line up anything.
It works, in principle, just as effectively as if we couldn't get
through at all."

Greg whistled soundlessly through suddenly bared teeth.

"That takes power," he said, "and I'm afraid Craven has it. Power to
burn."

"The collector field?" asked Russ.

Greg nodded. "A field that sucks in radiant energy. Free energy that he
just reaches out and grabs. And it doesn't depend on the Sun alone. It
probably makes use of every type of radiation in all of space."

Russ slumped in his chair, smoking, his forehead wrinkled in thought.

"If that's what he's got," he finally declared, "he's going to be hard
to crack. He can suck in any radiant vibration form, any space
vibration. He can shift them around, break them down and build them up.
He can discharge them, direct them. He's got a vibration plant that's
the handiest little war machine that ever existed."

Greg suddenly wheeled and walked to a wall cabinet. From it he took a
box and, opening it, lifted out a tiny mechanism.

He chuckled deep in his throat. "The mechanical shadow. The little
machine that always tells us where Craven is--as long as he's wearing
his glasses."

"He always wears them," said Russ crisply. "He's blind as a bat without
them."

Greg set the machine down on the table. "When we find Craven, we'll find
the contraption that's blanketing Jupiter and its moons."

Dials spun and needles quivered. Rapidly Russ jotted down the readings
on a sheet of paper. At the calculator, he tapped keys, depressed the
activator. The machine hummed and snarled and chuckled.

Russ glanced at the result imprinted on the paper roll.

"Craven is out near Jupiter," he announced. "About 75,000 miles distant
from its surface, in a plane normal to the Sun's rays."

"A spaceship," suggested Greg.

Russ nodded. "That's the only answer."

The two men looked at one another.

"That's something we can get hold of," said Greg.

He walked to the ship controls and lowered himself into the pilot's
chair. A hand came out and hauled back a lever.

The _Invincible_ moved.

From the engine rooms came the whine of the gigantic power plant as it
built up and maintained the gravity concentration center suddenly
created in front of the ship.

Russ, standing beside Greg at the control panel, looked out into space
and marveled. They were flashing through space, their speed building up
at a breath-taking rate, yet they had no real propulsion power. The
discovery of the gravity concentrator had outdated such a method of
driving a spaceship. Instead, they were falling, hurtling downward into
the yawning maw of an artificial gravity field. And such a method made
for speed, terrible speed.

Jupiter seemed to leap at them. It became a great crimson and yellow
ball that filled almost half the vision plate.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Invincible's_ speed was slacking off, slower and slower, until it
barely crawled in comparison to its former speed.

Slowly they circled Jupiter's great girth, staring out of the vision
port for a sight of Craven's ship. They were nearing the position the
little mechanical shadow had indicated.

"There it is," said Russ suddenly, almost breathlessly.

Far out in space, tiny, almost like a dust mote against the great bulk
of the monster planet, rode a tiny light. Slowly the _Invincible_
crawled inward. The mote of light became a gleaming silver ship, a
mighty ship--one that was fully as large as the _Invincible_!

"That's it all right," said Greg. "They're lying behind a log out here
raising hell with our television apparatus. Maybe we better tickle them
a little bit and see what they have."

Rising from the control board, he went to another control panel. Russ
remained standing in front of the vision plate, staring down at the
ship out in space.

Behind him came a shrill howl from the power plant. The _Invincible_
staggered slightly. A beam of deep indigo lashed across space, a finger
suddenly jabbing at the other ship.

Space was suddenly colored, for thousands of miles, as the beam struck
Craven's ship and seemed to explode in a blast of dazzling indigo light.
The ship reeled under the impact of the blow, reeled and weaved in space
as the beam struck it and delivered to it the mighty power of the
screaming engines back in the engine room.

"What happened?" Greg screamed above the roar.

Russ shrugged his shoulders. "You jarred him a little. Pushed him
through space for several hundred miles. Made him know something had hit
him, but it didn't seem to do any damage."

"That was pure cosmic I gave him! Five billion horsepower--and it just
staggered him!"

"He's got a space lens that absorbs the energy," said Russ. "The lens
concentrates it and pours it into a receiving chamber, probably a huge
photo-cell. Nobody yet has burned out one of those things on a closed
circuit."

Greg wrinkled his brow, perplexed. "What he must have is a special field
of some sort that lowers the wave-length and the intensity. He's getting
natural cosmics all the time and taking care of them."

"That wouldn't be much of a trick," Russ pointed out. "But when he takes
care of cosmics backed by five billion horsepower ... that's something
else!"

Greg grinned wickedly. "I'm going to hand him a long heat radiation. If
his field shortens that any, he'll have radio beam and that will blow
photo-cells all to hell."

He stabbed viciously at the keys on the board and once again the shrill
howl of the engines came from the rear of the ship. A lance of red
splashed out across space and touched the other ship. Again space was
lit, this time with a crimson glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ shook his head. "Nothing doing."

Greg sat down and looked at Russ. "Funny thing about this. They just sat
there and let us throw two charges at them, took everything we gave them
and never tried to hand it back."

"Maybe they haven't anything to hand us," Russ suggested hopefully.

"They must have. Craven wouldn't take to space with just a purely
defensive weapon. He knew we'd find him and he'd have a fight on his
hands."

Russ found his pipe was dead. Snapping his lighter, he applied flame to
the blackened tobacco. Walking slowly to the wall cabinet, he lifted two
other boxes out, set them on the table and took from them two other
mechanical shadows. He turned them on and leaned close, watching the
spinning dials, the quivering needles.

"Greg," he whispered, "Chambers and Stutsman are there in that ship with
Craven! Look, their shadows register identical with the one that spotted
Craven."

"I suspected as much," Greg replied. "We got the whole pack cornered out
here. If we can just get rid of them, the whole war would be won in one
stroke."

Russ lifted a stricken face from the row of tiny mechanisms. "This is
our big chance. We may never get it again. The next hour could decide
who is going to win."

Greg rose from the chair and stood before the control board. Grimly he
punched a series of keys. The engines howled again. Greg twisted a dial
and the howl rose into a shrill scream.

From the _Invincible_ another beam lashed out ... another and another.
Space was speared with beam after beam hurtling from the great ship.

Swiftly the beams went through the range of radiation, through radio and
short radio, infra-red, visible light, ultra-violet, X-ray, the gammas
and the cosmics--a terrific flood of billions of horsepower.

Craven's ship buckled and careened under the lashing impacts of the
bombardment, but it seemed unhurt!

Greg's face was bleaker than usual as he turned from the board to look
at Russ.

"We've used everything we have," he said, "and he's stopped them all. We
can't touch him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ shivered. The control room suddenly seemed chilly with a
frightening kind of cold.

"He's carrying photo-cells and several thousand tons of accumulator
stacks. Not much power left in them. He could pour a billion horsepower
into them for hours and still have room for more."

Greg nodded wearily. "All we've been doing is feeding him."

The engines were humming quietly now, singing the low song of power held
in leash.

But then they screamed like a buzz saw biting into an iron-hard stick of
white oak. Screamed in a single, frightful agony as they threw into the
protecting wall that enclosed the _Invincible_ all the power they could
develop.

The air of the ship was instantaneously charged with a hazy, bluish
glow, and the sharp, stinging odor of ozone filled the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside, an enormous burst of blue-white flame splashed and spattered
around the _Invincible_. Living lightning played in solid, snapping
sheets around the vision port and ran in trickling blazing fire across
the plates.

Russ cried out and backed away, holding his arm before his eyes. It was
as if he had looked into a nova of energy exploding before his eyes.

In the instant the scream died and the splash of terrific fire had
vanished. Only a rapidly dying glow remained.

"What was it?" asked Russ dazedly. "What happened? Ten engines every one
of them capable of over five billion horsepower and every one of them
screaming!"

"Craven," said Greg grimly. "He let us have everything he had. He simply
drained his accumulator stacks and threw it all into our face. But he's
done now. That was his only shot. He'll have to build up power now and
that will take a while. But we couldn't have taken much more."

"Stalemate," said Russ. "We can't hurt him, he can't hurt us."

"Not by a damn sight," declared Greg. "I still have a trick or two in
mind."

He tried them. From the _Invincible_ a fifty-billion-horsepower bolt of
living light and fire sprang out as all ten engines thundered with an
insane voice that racked the ship.

Fireworks exploded in space when the bolt struck Craven's ship. Screen
after screen exploded in glittering, flaming sparks, but the ship rode
the lashing charge, finally halted the thrust of power. The beam glowed
faintly, died out.

Perspiration streamed down Greg's face as he bent over a calculator and
constructed the formula for a magnetic field. He sent out a field of
such unimaginable intensity that it would have drawn any beryl-steel
within a mile of it into a hard, compact mass. Even the _Invincible_, a
hundred miles away, lurched under the strain. But Craven's ship, after
the first wild jerk, did not move. A curious soft glow spread out from
the ship, veered sharply and disappeared in the magnetic field.

Greg swore softly. "He's cutting it down as fast as I try to build it
up," he explained, "and I can't move it any nearer."

From Craven's ship lashed out another thunderbolt and once again the
engines screamed in terrible unison as they poured power into the ship's
triple screen. The first screen stopped all material things. The second
stopped radiations by refracting them into the fourth dimension. The
third shield was akin to the anti-entropy field, which stopped all
matter ... and yet the ten engines bellowed like things insane as Craven
struck with flaming bolts, utilizing the power he had absorbed from the
fifty billion horsepower Greg had thrown at him.

There was anger in Greg Manning's face ... a terrible anger. His fists
knotted and he shook them at the gleaming ship that lay far down near
Jupiter.

"I've got one trick left," he shouted, almost as if he expected Craven
to hear. "Just one trick. Damn you, see if you can stop this one!"

He set up the pattern on the board and punched the activating lever. The
ten engines thrummed with power. Then the howling died away.

Four times they screamed and four times they ebbed into a gentle hum.

"Get on the navigation controls!" yelled Greg. "Be ready to give the
ship all you've got."

Greg leaped for the control chair, grasped the acceleration lever.

"Now," growled Greg, "look out, Craven, we're coming at you!"

Greg, teeth gritted, slammed the acceleration over.

Suddenly all space wrenched horribly with a nauseating, terrible thud
that seemed to strain at the very anchors of the Universe.




_CHAPTER EIGHTEEN_


Jupiter and the Jovian worlds leaped suddenly backward, turned swiftly
green, then blue, and faded in an instant into violet. The Sun spun
crazily through space, retreating, dimming to a tiny ruby-tinted star.

The giant generators in the _Invincible_ hummed louder now, continually
louder, a steel-throated roar that trembled through every plate, through
every girder, through every bit of metal in the ship.

The ship itself was plunging spaceward, streaking like a runaway star
for the depths of space beyond the Solar System. And behind it, caught
tight, gripped and held, Craven's ship trailed at the end of a tractor
field that bound it to the space-rocketing _Invincible_.

The acceleration compensator, functioning perfectly, had taken up the
slack as the ship had plunged from a standing start into a speed that
neared the pace of light. But it had never been built to stand such
sudden, intense acceleration, and for an instant Russ and Greg seemed
to be crushed by a mighty weight that struck at them. The sensation
swiftly lifted as the compensator took up the load.

       *       *       *       *       *

Greg shook his head, flinging the trickling perspiration from his eyes.

"I hope their compensator worked as well as ours," he said.

"If it didn't," declared Russ, "we're towing a shipload of dead men."

Russ glanced at the speed dial. They were almost touching the speed of
light. "He hasn't cut down our speed yet."

"We threw him off his balance. His drive depends largely on the mass of
some planet as a body to take up the reaction of his ship. Jupiter is
the ideal body for that ... but he's leaving Jupiter behind. He has to
do something soon or it'll be too late."

"He's getting less energy, too," said Russ. "We're retreating from his
main sources of energy, the Sun and Jupiter. Almost the speed of light
and that would cut down his energy intake terrifically. He has to use
what he's got in his accumulators, and after that last blast at us, they
must be nearly drained."

As Russ watched, the speed needle fell off slightly. Russ held his
breath. It edged back slowly, creeping. The speed was being cut down.

"Craven is using whatever power he has," he said. "They're alive back
there, all right. He's trying to catch hold of Jupiter and make its
gravity work for him."

The _Invincible_ felt the strain of the other ship now. Felt it as
Craven poured power into his drive, fighting to get free of the
invisible hawser that had trapped him, fighting against being dragged
into outer space at the tail-end of a mighty craft heading spaceward
with frightening speed.

Girders groaned in the _Invincible_, the engines moaned and throbbed.
The speed needle fell back, creeping down the dial, slowly, unwillingly,
resisting any drop in speed. But Craven was cutting it down. And as he
cut it, he was able to absorb more energy with his collector lens. But
he was fighting two things ... momentum and the steadily decreasing
gravitational pull of Jupiter and the Sun. The Sun's pull was dwindling
slowly, Jupiter's rapidly.

The needle still crept downward.

"What's his point of equality to us?" demanded Greg. "Will we make it?"

Russ shook his head. "Won't know for hours. He'll be able to slow us
up ... maybe he'll even stop us or be able to jerk free, although I
doubt that. But every minute takes him farther away from his main source
of power, the Solar System's radiation. He could collect power anywhere
in space, you know, but the best place to collect it is near large
radiant bodies."

Russ continued to crouch over the dial, begrudging every backward
flicker of the needle.

This was the last play, the final hand. If they could drag Craven and
his ship away from the Solar System, maroon him deep in space, far
removed from any source of radiation, they would win, for they could go
back and finish the work of smashing Interplanetary.

But if Craven won--if he could halt their mad dash for space, if he
could shake free--they'd never have another chance. He would be studying
that field they had wrapped around him, be ready for it next time, might
even develop one like it and use it on the _Invincible_. If Craven could
win his way back to the Sun, he would be stronger than they were, could
top them in power, shatter all their plans, and once again the worlds
would bow to Interplanetary and Spencer Chambers.

Russ watched the meter. The speed was little more than ten miles a
second now and dropping rapidly. He sat motionless, hunched, sucking at
his dead pipe, listening to the thrumming of the generators.

       *       *       *       *       *

"If we only had a margin," he groaned. "If we just had a few more
horsepower. Just a few. But we're wide open. Every engine is developing
everything it can!"

Greg tapped him on the shoulder, gently. Russ turned his head and looked
into the face of his friend, a face as bleak as ever, but with a hint of
smile in the corners of the eyes.

"Why not let Jupiter help us?" he asked. "He could be a lot of help."

Russ stared for a moment, uncomprehending. Then with a sob of gladness
he reached out a hand, shoved over a lever. Mirrors of anti-entropy
shifted, assumed different angles, and the _Invincible_ sheered off.
They were no longer retreating directly from the Sun, but at an angle
quartering off across the Solar System.

Greg grinned. "We're falling behind Jupiter now. Letting Jupiter run
away from us as he circles his orbit, following the Sun. Adds miles per
second to our velocity of retreat, even if it doesn't show on the dial."

The cosmic tug of war went on, grimly--two ships straining, fighting
each other, one seeking to escape, the other straining to snake the
second ship into the maw of open, hostile space.

The speed was down to five miles a second, then a fraction lower. The
needle was flickering now, impossible to decide whether it was dropping
or not. And in the engine rooms, ten great generators howled in their
attempt to make that needle move up the dial again.

Russ lit his pipe, his eyes not leaving the dial. The needle was
creeping lower again. Down to three miles a second now.

He puffed clouds of smoke and considered. Saturn fortunately was ninety
degrees around in his orbit. On the present course, only Neptune
remained between them and free space. Pluto was far away, but even if it
had been, it really wouldn't count, for it was small and had little
attraction.

In a short while Ganymede and Callisto would be moving around on the far
side of Jupiter and that might help. Everything counted so much now.

The dial was down to two miles a second and there it hung. Hung and
stayed. Russ watched it with narrowed eyes. By this time Craven
certainly would have given up much hope of help from Jupiter. If the big
planet couldn't have helped him before, it certainly couldn't now. In
another hour or two Earth would transit the Sun and that would cut down
the radiant energy to some degree. But in the meantime Craven was
loading his photo-cells and accumulators, was laying up a power reserve.
As a last desperate resort he would use that power, in a final attempt
to break away from the _Invincible_.

Russ waited for that attempt. There was nothing that could be done about
it. The engines were developing every watt of power that could be urged
out of them. If Craven had the power to break away, he would break
away ... that was all there would be to it.

An hour passed and the needle crept up a fraction of a point. Russ was
still watching the dial, his mind foggy with concentration.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly the _Invincible_ shuddered and seemed to totter in space, as if
something, some mighty force, had struck the ship a terrific blow. The
needle swung swiftly backward, reached one mile a second, dipped to half
a mile.

Russ sat bolt upright, holding his breath, his teeth clenched with death
grip upon the pipe-stem.

Craven had blasted with everything he had! He had used every last
trickle of power in the accumulators ... all the power he had been
storing up.

Russ leaped from the chair and raced to the periscopic mirror.
Stooping, he stared into it. Far back in space, like a silver bauble,
swung Craven's ship. It swung back and forth in space, like a mighty,
cosmic pendulum. Breathlessly he watched. The ship was still in the grip
of the space field!

"Greg," he shouted, "we've got him!"

He raced back to the control panel, snapped a glance at the speed dial.
The needle was rising rapidly now, a full mile a second. Within another
fifteen minutes, it had climbed to a mile and a half. The _Invincible_
was starting to go places!

The engines still howled, straining, shrieking, roaring their defiance.

In an hour the needle indicated the speed of four miles a second. Two
hours later it was ten and rising visibly as Jupiter fell far behind and
the Sun became little more than a glowing cinder.

Russ swung the controls to provide side acceleration and the two ships
swung far to the rear of Neptune. They would pass that massive planet at
the safe distance of a full hundred million miles.

"He won't even make a pass at it," said Greg. "He knows he's licked."

"Probably trying to store some more power," suggested Russ.

"Sweet chance he has to do that," declared Greg. "Look at that needle
walk, will you? We'll hit the speed of light in a few more hours and
after that he may just as well shut off his lens. There just won't be
any radiation for him to catch."

Craven didn't make a try at Neptune. The planet was far away when they
intersected its orbit ... furthermore, a wall of darkness had closed in
about the ships. They were going three times as fast as light and the
speed was still accelerating!

Hour after hour, day after day, the _Invincible_ and its trailing
captive sped doggedly outward into space. Out into the absolute wastes
of interstellar space, where the stars were flecks of light, like tiny
eyes watching from very far away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ lounged in the control chair and stared out the vision plate. There
was nothing to see, nothing to do. There hadn't been anything to see or
do for days. The controls were locked at maximum and the engines still
hammered their roaring song of speed and power. Before them stretched an
empty gulf that probably never before had been traversed by any
intelligence, certainly not by man.

Out into the mystery of interstellar space. Only it didn't seem
mysterious. It was very commonplace and ordinary, almost monotonous.
Russ gripped his pipe and chuckled.

There had been a day when men had maintained one couldn't go faster than
light. Also, men had claimed that it would be impossible to force nature
to give up the secret of material energy. But here they were, speeding
along faster than light, their engines roaring with the power of
material energy.

They were plowing a new space road, staking out a new path across the
deserts of space, pioneering far beyond the 'last frontier.'

Greg's steps sounded across the room. "We've gone a long way, Russ.
Maybe we better begin to slow down a bit."

"Yes," agreed Russ. He leaned forward and grasped the controls. "We'll
slow down now," he said.

Sudden silence smote the ship. Their ears, accustomed for days to the
throaty roarings of the engines, rang with the torture of no sound.

Long minutes and then new sounds began to be heard ... the soft humming
of the single engine that provided power for the interior apparatus and
the maintenance of the outer screens.

"Soon as we slow down below the speed of light," said Greg, "we'll throw
the televisor on Craven's ship and learn what we can about his
apparatus. No use trying it now, for we couldn't use it, because we're
in the same space condition it uses in normal operation."

"In fact," laughed Russ, "we can't do much of anything except move.
Energies simply can't pass through this space we're in. We're marooned."

Greg sat down in a chair, gazed solemnly at Russ.

"Just what was our top speed?" he demanded.

Russ grinned. "Ten thousand times the speed of light," he said.

Greg whistled soundlessly. "A long way from home."

       *       *       *       *       *

Far away, the stars were tiny pinpoints, like little crystals shining by
the reflection of a light. Pinpoints of light and shimmering masses of
lacy silver ... star dust that seemed ghostly and strange, but was in
reality the massing of many million mighty stars. And great empty black
spaces where there was not a single light, where the dark went on and on
and did not stop.

Greg exhaled his breath softly. "Well, we're here."

"Wherever that might be," amended Russ.

There were no familiar constellations, not a single familiar star. Every
sign post of the space they had known was wiped out.

"There really aren't any brilliant stars," said Russ. "None at all. We
must be in a sort of hole in space, a place that's relatively empty of
any stars."

Greg nodded soberly. "Good thing we have those mechanical shadows.
Without them we'd never find our way back home. But we have several that
will lead us back."

Outside the vision panel, they could see Craven's ship. Freed now of the
space field, it was floating slowly, still under the grip of the
momentum they had built up in their dash across space. It was so close
that they could see the lettering across its bow.

"So they call it the _Interplanetarian_," said Russ.

Greg nodded. "Guess it's about time we talk to them. I'm afraid they're
getting pretty nervous."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Do you have any idea where we are?" demanded Ludwig Stutsman.

Craven shook his head. "No more idea than you have. Manning snaked us
across billions of miles, clear out of the Solar System into
interstellar space. Take a look at those stars and you get some idea."

Spencer Chambers stroked his gray mustache, asked calmly: "What do you
figure our chances are of getting back?"

"That's something we'll know more about later," said Craven. "Doesn't
look too bright right now. I'm not worrying about that. What I'm
wondering about is what Manning and Page are going to do now that they
have us out here."

"I thought you'd be," said a voice that came out of clear air.

They stared at the place from which the voice had seemed to come. There
was a slight refraction in the air; then, swiftly, a man took shape. It
was Manning. He stood before them, smiling.

"Hello, Manning," said Craven. "I figured you'd pay us a call when you
got around to it."

"Look here," snarled Stutsman, but he stopped when Chambers' hand fell
upon his shoulder, gripped it hard.

"Got plenty of air?" asked Greg.

"Air? Sure. Atmosphere machines working perfectly," Craven replied.

"Fine," said Greg. "How about food and water? Plenty of both?"

"Plenty," said Craven.

"Look here, Manning," broke in Chambers, "where's all this questioning
leading? What have you got up your sleeve?"

"Just wanted to be sure," Greg told him. "Would hate to have you fellows
starve on me, or go thirsty. Wouldn't want to come back and find you all
dead."

"Come back?" asked Chambers wonderingly. "I'm afraid I don't understand.
Is this a joke of some sort?"

"No joke," said Greg grimly. "I thought you might have guessed. I'm
going to leave you here."

"Leave us here?" roared Stutsman.

"Keep your shirt on," snapped Greg. "Just for a while, until we can go
back to the Solar System and finish a little job we're doing. Then we'll
come back and get you."

Craven grimaced. "I thought it would be something like that." He
squinted at Manning through the thick lenses. "You never miss a bet, do
you?"

Greg laughed. "I try not to."

A little silence fell upon the three men and Manning's image.

Greg broke it. "How about your energy collector?" he asked Craven. "Will
it maintain the ship out here? You get cosmic rays. Not too much else,
I'm afraid."

Craven grinned wryly. "You're right, but we can get along. The
accumulators are practically drained, though, and we won't be able to
store anything. Would you mind shooting us over just a little power?
Enough to charge the accumulators a little for emergency use."

He looked over his shoulder, almost apprehensively.

"There might be an emergency out here, you know. Nobody knows anything
about this place."

"I'll give you a little power," Greg agreed.

"Thank you very much," said Craven, half in mockery. "No doubt you think
yourself quite smart, Manning, getting us out here. You know you have us
stranded, that we can't collect more than enough power to live on."

"That's why I did it," Greg said, and vanished.




_CHAPTER NINETEEN_


Craven watched the _Invincible_ gather speed and tear swiftly through
the black, saw it grow tiny and then disappear entirely, either
swallowed by the distance or snapping into the strange super-space that
existed beyond the speed of light.

He turned from the window, chuckling.

Stutsman snarled at him: "What's so funny?"

The scientist glared at the wolfish face and without speaking, walked to
the desk and sat down. He reached for pencil and paper.

Chambers walked over to watch him.

"You've found something, Doctor," he said quietly.

Craven laughed, throatily. "Yes, I have. I've found a lot. Manning
thinks he can keep us out here, but he's wrong. We'll be in the Solar
System less than a week after he gets there."

Chambers stifled a gasp, tried to speak calmly. "You mean this?"

"Of course I mean it. I don't waste my time with foolish jokes."

"You have the secret of material energy?"

"Not that," the scientist growled, "but I have something else as
valuable. I have the secret of Manning's drive: I know what it is that
enables him to exceed the speed of light ... to go ten thousand times as
fast as light ... the Lord knows how much faster if he wanted to."

"No ordinary drive would do that," said Chambers. "It would take more
than power to make a ship go that fast."

"You bet your life it would, and Manning is the boy who's got it. He
uses a space field. I think I can duplicate it."

"And how long will it take you to do this work?"

"About a week," Craven told him. "Perhaps a little longer, perhaps a
little less. But once we go, we'll go as fast as Manning does. We'll be
short on power, but I think I can do something about that, too."

Chambers took a chair beside the desk. "But do we know the way home?"

"We can find it," said Craven.

"But there are no familiar constellations," objected Chambers. "He
dragged us out so far that there isn't a single star that any one of us
can identify."

"I said I'd find the Solar System," Craven declared impatiently, "and I
will. Manning started out for it, didn't he? I saw the way he went. The
Sun is a type G star and all I'll do is look for a type G star."

"But there may be more than one type G star," objected the financier.

"Probably are," Craven agreed, "but there are other ways of finding the
Sun and identifying it."

He volunteered no further information, went back to work with the pad
and pencil. Chambers rose wearily from his chair.

"Tell me when you know what we can do," he said.

"Sure," Craven grunted.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's the Sun," said Craven. "That faint star between those two
brighter ones."

"Are you sure of it?" demanded Stutsman.

"Of course. I don't make blunders."

"It's the only type G star in that direction," suggested Chambers,
helpfully.

"Not that, either," declared Craven. "In fact, there are several type G
stars. I examined them all and I know I'm right."

"How do you know?" challenged Stutsman.

"Spectroscopic examination. That collector field of ours gathers energy
just like a burning glass. You've seen a burning glass, haven't you?"

He stared at Stutsman, directing the question at him.

Stutsman shuffled awkwardly, unhappily.

"Well," Craven went on, "I used that for a telescope. Gathered the light
from the suns and analyzed it. Of course it didn't act like a real
telescope, produce an image or anything like that, but it was ideal for
spectroscopic work."

They waited for him to explain. Finally, he continued:

"All of the stars I examined were just type G stars, nothing else, but
there was a difference in one of them. First, the spectroscope showed
lines of reflected light passing through oxygen and hydrogen, water
vapor and carbon dioxide. Pure planetary phenomena, never found on a
star itself. Also it showed that a certain per cent of the light was
polarized. Now remember that I examined it for a long time and I found
out something else from the length of observation which convinces me.
The light varied with a periodic irregularity. The chronometers aren't
working exactly right out here, so I can't give you any explanation in
terms of hours. But I find a number of regularly recurring changes in
light intensity and character ... and that proves the presence of a
number of planetary bodies circling the star. That's the only way one
could explain the fluctuations for the G-type star is a steady type. It
doesn't vary greatly and has no light fluctuations to speak of. Not like
the Cepheid and Mira types."

"And that proves it's our Sun?" asked Chambers.

Craven nodded. "Fairly definitely, I'd say."

"How far away is it?" Stutsman wanted to know.

       *       *       *       *       *

Craven snorted. "You would ask something like that."

"But," declared Stutsman, "there are ways of measuring how far a star is
away from any point, measuring both the distance and the size of the
star."

"Okay," agreed Craven, "you find me something solid and within reach
that's measurable. Something, preferably, about 200 million miles or so
across. Then I'll tell you how far we are from the Sun. This ship is not
in an orbit. It's not fixed in space. I have no accurate way of
measuring distances and angles simultaneously and accurately. Especially
angles as small as these would be."

Craven and Stutsman glared at one another.

"It's a long way however you look at it," the financier said. "If we're
going to get there, we'll have to start as soon as possible. How soon
can we start, Doctor?"

"Very soon. I have the gravity concentration field developed and
Manning left me just enough power to get a good start." He chuckled,
took off his glasses, wiped the lenses and put them back on again.
"Imagine him giving me that power!"

"But after we use up that power, what are we going to do?" demanded
Chambers. "This collector lens of yours won't furnish us enough to keep
going."

"You're right," Craven conceded, "but we'll be able to get more. We'll
build up what speed we can and then we'll shut off the drive and let
momentum carry us along. In the meantime our collector will gather power
for us. We're advancing toward the source of radiation now, instead of
away from it. Out here, where there's little gravity stress, fewer
conflicting lines of gravitation, we'll be able to spread out the field,
widen it, make it thousands of miles across. And the new photo-cells
will be a help as well."

"How are the photo-cells coming?" asked Chambers.

Craven grinned. "We'll have a bank of them in within a few hours, and
replace the others as fast as we can. I have practically the whole crew
at work on them. Manning doesn't know it, but he found the limit of
those photo-cells when he was heaving energy at us back in the Solar
System. He blistered them. I wouldn't have thought it possible, but it
was. You have to hand it to Manning and Page. They are a couple of smart
men."

To the eye there was only one slight difference between the old cells
and the new ones. The new type cell, when on no load, appeared milky
white, whereas the old cells on no load were silvery. The granular
surface of the new units was responsible for the difference in
appearance, for each minute section of the surface was covered with even
more minute metallic hexagonal pyramids and prisms.

"Just a little matter of variation in the alloy," Craven explained.
"Crystalization of the alloy, forming those little prisms and pyramids.
As a result, you get a surface thousands of times greater than in the
old type. Helps you absorb every bit of the energy."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Interplanetarian_ arrowed swiftly starward, driving ahead with
terrific momentum while the collector lens, sweeping up the oncoming
radiations, charged the great banks of accumulators. The G-type star
toward which they were heading was still pale, but the two brighter
stars to either side blazed like fiery jewels against the black of
space.

"You say we'll be only a week or so behind Manning?" asked Chambers.

Craven looked at the financier, his eyes narrowed behind the heavy
lenses. He sucked in his loose lips and turned once again to the control
board.

"Perhaps a little longer," he admitted finally. "We're losing time,
having to go along on momentum in order to collect power. But the nearer
we get to those stars, the more power we'll have and we'll be able to
move faster."

Chambers drummed idly on the arm of his chair, thinking.

"Perhaps there's time yet," he said, half to himself. "With the power
we'll have within the Solar System, we can stop Manning and the
revolution. We can gain control again."

       *       *       *       *       *

Craven was silent, watching the dials.

"Manning might even pass us on the way back to look for us," Chambers
went on. "He thinks we're still out there. He wouldn't expect to find us
where we are, light years from where we started."

Craven shot him a curious look. "I wouldn't be too sure of that. Manning
has a string of some sort tied to us. He's got us tagged ... good and
proper. He's always been able to find us again, no matter where we were.
I have a hunch he'll find us again, even way out here."

Chambers shrugged his shoulders. "It really doesn't matter. Just so we
get close enough to the Sun so we can load those accumulators and jam
the photo-cells full. With a load like that we can beat him hands down."

The financier fell into a silence. He stared out of the vision plate,
watching the stars. Still far away, but so much nearer than they had
been.

His brain hummed with dreams. Old dreams, revived again, old dreams of
conquest and of empire, dreams of a power that held a solar system in
its grip.

Craven broke his chain of thoughts. "Where's our friend Stutsman? I
haven't seen him around lately."

Chambers chuckled good-naturedly. "He's sulking. He seems to have gotten
the idea neither one of us likes him. He's been spending most of his
time back in the engine room with the crew."

"Were you talking about me?" asked a silky voice.

They spun around to see Stutsman standing in the doorway of the control
room. His face was twisted into a wolfish grin and in his right hand he
held a heat gun.

Chambers' voice was sharp, like the note of a clanging bell. "What's
this?"

Stutsman's face twisted into an even more exaggerated grin. "This," he
said, "is mutiny. I'm taking over!" He laughed at them.

"No use calling the crew. They're with me."

"Damn you!" shouted Chambers, taking a step forward. He halted as
Stutsman jerked the pistol up.

"Forget it, Chambers. You're just second man from now on. Maybe not even
second man. You tried out this dictator business and you bungled it. You
went soft. You're taking orders from me from now on. No questions, no
back talk. You do as I say and maybe you won't get hurt."

"You're mad, Stutsman!" cried Chambers. "You can't get away with this."

Stutsman barked out a brittle laugh. "Who is going to stop me?"

"The people," Chambers shouted at him. "The people will. They won't
allow this. When you get back to the Solar System ..."

Stutsman growled, stepping toward Chambers, pistol leveled. "The people
won't have anything to say about this. I'll rule the Solar System the
way I want to. There won't be anyone else who'll have a thing to say
about it. So you dreamed of empire, did you? You dreamed of a solar
dictatorship. Well, watch me! I'll build a real empire. But I'll be the
head of it ... not you."

Craven sat down in his chair, crossed his knees. "Just what do you plan
to do, Dictator Stutsman?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Stutsman fairly foamed at the mouth over the insolence of Craven's
voice. "I'll smash Manning first. I'll wipe him out. This ship will do
it. You said yourself it would. You have ten times the power he has. And
then ..."

Craven raised a hand and waved him into silence. "So you plan to reach
the Solar System, do you? You plan to meet Manning, and destroy his
ship. Nice plan."

"What's wrong with it?" challenged Stutsman.

"Nothing," said Craven calmly. "Absolutely nothing at all ... _except
that we may never reach the Solar System_!"

Stutsman seemed to sag. The wolfish snarl on his lips drooped. His eyes
stared. Then with an effort he braced himself.

"What do you mean? Why can't we?" He gestured toward the vision plate,
toward the tiny yellow star between the two brighter stars.

"That," said Craven, "isn't our Sun. It has planets, but it isn't our
Sun."

Chambers stepped quickly to Craven, reached out a hand and hoisted him
from the chair, shook him.

"You must be joking! That has to be the Sun!"

Craven shrugged free of Chambers' clutch, spoke in an even voice. "I
never joke. We made a mistake, that's all. I hadn't meant to tell you
yet. I had intended to get in close to the star and take on a full load
of power and then try to locate our Sun. But I'm afraid it's a hopeless
task."

"A hopeless task?" shrieked Stutsman. "You are trying to trick me. This
is put up between the two of you. That's the Sun over there. I know it
is!"

"It isn't," said Craven. "Manning tricked us. He started off in the
wrong direction. He made us think he was going straight back to the
Solar System, but he didn't. He circled and went in some other
direction."

The scientist eyed Stutsman calmly. Stutsman's knuckles were white with
the grip he had upon the gun.

"We're lost," Craven told him, looking squarely at him. "We may never
find the Solar System!"




_CHAPTER TWENTY_


The revolution was over. Interplanetary officials and army heads had
fled to the sanctuary of Earth. Interplanetary was ended ... ended
forever, for on every world, including Earth, material energy engines
were humming. The people had power to burn, to throw away, power so
cheap that it was practically worthless as a commodity, but invaluable
as a way to a new life, a greater life, a fuller life ... a broader
destiny for the human race.

Interplanetary stocks were worthless. The mighty power plants on Venus
and Mercury were idle. The only remaining tangible asset were the fleets
of spaceships used less than a month before to ship the accumulators to
the outer worlds, to bring them Sunward for recharging.

Patents protecting the rights to the material energy engines had been
obtained from every government throughout the Solar System. New
governments were being formed on the wreckage of the old. John Moore
Mallory already had been inaugurated as president of the Jovian
confederacy. The elections on Mars and Venus would be held within a
week.

Mercury, its usefulness gone with the smashing of the accumulator trade,
had been abandoned. No human foot now trod its surface. Its mighty domes
were empty. It went its way, as it had gone for billions of years, a
little burned out, worthless planet, ignored and shunned. For a brief
moment it had known the conquering tread of mankind, had played its part
in the commerce of the worlds, but now it had reverted to its former
state ... a lonely wanderer of the regions near the Sun, a pariah among
the other planets.

       *       *       *       *       *

Russell Page looked across the desk at Gregory Manning. He heaved a sigh
and dug the pipe out of his jacket pocket.

"It's finished, Greg," he said.

Greg nodded solemnly, watching Russ fill the bowl and apply the match.

Except for the small crew, they were alone in the _Invincible_. John
Moore Mallory and the others were on their own worlds, forming their own
governments, carrying out the dictates of the people, men who would go
down in solar history.

The _Invincible_ hung just off Callisto. Russ looked out at the mighty
moon, saw the lonely stretches of its ice-bound surface, saw the silvery
spot that was the dome of Ranthoor.

"All done," said Greg, "except for one thing."

"Go out and get Chambers and the others," said Russ, puffing at the
pipe.

Greg nodded. "We may as well get started."

Russ rose slowly, went to the wall cabinet and lifted out a box, the
mechanical shadow with its tiny space field surrounding the fleck of
steel that would lead them to the _Interplanetarian_. Carefully he
lifted the machine from its resting place and set it on the desk.
Bending over it, he watched the dials.

Suddenly he whistled. "Greg, they've moved! They aren't where we left
them!"

Greg sprang to his side and stared at the readings. "They're moving
farther away from us ... out into space. Where can they be going?"

Russ straightened, scowling, pulling at the pipe. "They probably found
another G-type star, and are heading for that. They must think it is old
Sol."

"That sounds like it," said Greg. "We spun all over the map to throw
Craven off and looped several times so he'd lose all sense of direction.
Naturally he would be lost."

"But he's evidently got something," Russ pointed out. "We left him
marooned ... dead center, out where he didn't have too much radiation
and couldn't get leverage on any single body. Yet he's moving--and
getting farther away all the time."

"He solved our gravitation concentration screen," said Greg. "He tricked
us into giving him power to build it."

The two men looked at one another for a long minute.

"Well," said Russ, "that's that. Craven and Chambers and Stutsman. The
three villains. All lost in space. Heading for the wrong star.
Hopelessly lost. Maybe they'll never find their way back."

He stopped and relit his pipe. An aching silence fell in the room.

"Poetic justice," said Russ. "Hail and farewell."

Greg rubbed his fist indecisively along the desk. "I can't do it, Russ.
We took them out there. We marooned them. We have to get them back or I
couldn't sleep nights."

Russ laughed quietly, watching the bleak face that stared at him. "I
knew that's what you'd say."

He knocked out the pipe, crushed a fleck of burning tobacco with his
boot. Pocketing the pipe, he walked to the control panel, sat down and
reached for the lever. The engines hummed louder and louder. The
_Invincible_ darted spaceward.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's too late now," said Chambers. "By the time we reach that planetary
system and charge our accumulators, Manning and Page will have
everything under control back in the Solar System. Even if we could
locate the star that was our Sun, we wouldn't have a chance to get there
in time."

"Too bad," Craven said, and wagged his head, looking like a solemn owl.
"Too bad. Dictator Stutsman won't have a chance to strut his stuff."

Stutsman started to say something and thought better of it. He leaned
back in his chair. From his belt hung a heat pistol.

Chambers eyed the pistol with ill-concealed disgust. "There's no point
in playing soldier. We aren't going to try to upset your mutiny. So far
your taking over the ship hasn't made any difference to us ... so why
should we fight you?"

"It isn't going to make any difference either," said Craven. "Because
there are just two things that will happen to us. We're either lost
forever, will never find our way back, will spend the rest of our days
wandering from star to star, or Manning will come out and take us by the
ear and lead us home again."

Chambers started, leaned forward and fastened his steely eyes on Craven.
"Do you really think he could find us?"

"I have no doubt of it," Craven replied. "I don't know how he does it,
but I'm convinced he can. Probably, however, he'll find that we are lost
and get rid of us that way."

"No," said Chambers, "you're wrong there. Manning wouldn't do that.
He'll come to get us."

"I don't know why he should," snapped Craven.

"Because he's that sort of man," declared Chambers.

"What you going to do when he does get out here?" demanded Stutsman.
"Fall on his neck and kiss him?"

Chambers smiled, stroked his mustache. "Why, no," he said. "I imagine
we'll fight. We'll give him everything we've got and he'll do the same.
It wouldn't seem natural if we didn't."

"You're damned right we will," growled Stutsman. "Because I'm running
this show. You seem to keep forgetting that. We have power enough, when
we get those accumulators filled, to wipe him out. And that is exactly
what I'm going to do."

"Fine," said Craven, mockingly, "just fine. There's just one thing you
forget. Manning is the only man who can lead us back to the Solar
System."

"Hell," stormed Stutsman, "that doesn't make any difference. I'll find
my way back there some way."

"You're afraid of Manning," Chambers challenged.

Stutsman's hand went down to the heat pistol's grip. His eyes glazed and
his face twisted itself into utter hatred. "I don't know why I keep on
letting you live. Craven is valuable to me. I can't kill him. But you
aren't. You aren't worth a damn to anyone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Chambers matched his stare. Stutsman's hand dropped from the pistol and
he slouched to his feet, walked from the room.

Afraid of Manning! He laughed, a hollow, gurgling laugh. Afraid of
Manning!

But he was.

Within his brain hammered a single sentence. Words he had heard Manning
speak as he watched over the television set at Manning's mocking
invitation. Words that beat into his brain and seared his reason and
made his soul shrivel and grow small.

Manning talking to Scorio. Talking to him matter-of-factly, but grimly:
"_I promise you that we'll take care of Stutsman!_"

Manning had taken Scorio and his gangsters one by one and sent them to
far corners of the Solar System. One out to the dreaded Vulcan Fleet,
one to the Outpost, one to the Titan prison, and one to the hell-hole
on Vesta, while Scorio had gone to a little mountain set in a Venus
swamp. They hadn't a chance. They had been locked within a force shell
and shunted through millions of miles of space. No trial, no hearing ...
nothing. Just terrible, unrelenting judgment.

"_I promise you that we'll take care of Stutsman!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Craven's only a few billion miles ahead now," said Gregory Manning.
"With our margin of speed, we should overhaul him in a few more hours.
He is still short on power, but he's remedying that rapidly. He's
getting nearer to that sun every minute. Running in toward it as he is,
he tends to sweep up outpouring radiations. That helps him collect a
whole lot more than he would under ordinary circumstances."

Russ, sitting before the controls, pipe clenched in his teeth, watching
the dials, nodded soberly.

"All I'm afraid of," he said, "is that he'll get too close to that sun
before we catch up with him. If he gets close enough so he can fill
those accumulators, he'll pack a bigger wallop than we do. It'll all be
in one bolt, of course, for his power isn't continuous like ours. He has
to collect it slowly. But when he's really loaded, he can give us aces
and still win. I'd hate to take everything he could pack into those
accumulators."

Greg shuddered. "So would I."

The _Invincible_ was exceeding the speed of light, was enveloped in the
mysterious darkness that characterized the speed. They could see nothing
outside the ship, for there was nothing to see. But the tiny mechanical
shadow, occupying a place of honor on the navigation board, kept them
informed of the position and the distance of the _Interplanetarian_.

Greg lolled in his chair, watching Russ.

"I don't think we need to worry about him throwing the entire load of
the accumulators at us," he said. "He wouldn't dare load those
accumulators to peak capacity. He's got to leave enough carrying
capacity in the cells to handle any jolts we send him and he knows we
can send him plenty. He has to keep that handling margin at all times,
over and above what he takes in for power, because his absorption screen
is also a defensive screen. And he has to use some power to keep our
television apparatus out."

Russ chuckled. "I suppose, at that, we have him plenty worried."

The thunder of the engines filled the control room. For days now that
thunder had been in their ears. They had grown accustomed to it, now
hardly noticed it. Ten mighty engines, driving the _Invincible_ at a
pace no other ship had ever obtained, except, possibly, the
_Interplanetarian_, although lack of power should have held Craven's
ship down to a lower speed. Craven wouldn't have dared to build up the
acceleration they had now attained, for he would have drained his banks
and been unable to charge them again.

"Maybe he won't fight," said Russ. "Maybe he's figured out by this time
that he's heading for the wrong star. He may be glad to see us and
follow us back to the Solar System."

"No chance of that. Craven and Chambers won't pass up a chance for a
fight. They'll give us a few wallops if only for the appearance of
things."

"We're crawling up all the time," said Russ. "If we can catch him within
four or five billion miles of the star, he won't be too tough to handle.
Be getting plenty of radiations even then, but not quite as much as he
would like to have."

"He'll have to start decelerating pretty soon," Greg declared. "He can't
run the chance of smashing into the planetary system at the speed he's
going. He won't want to waste too much power using his field as a brake,
because he must know by this time that we're after him and he'll want
what power he has to throw at us."

Hours passed. The _Invincible_ crept nearer and nearer, suddenly seemed
to leap ahead as the _Interplanetarian_ began deceleration.

"Keep giving her all you got," Greg urged Russ. "We've got plenty of
power for braking. We can overhaul him and stop in a fraction of the
time he does."

Russ nodded grimly. The distance indicator needle on the mechanical
shadow slipped off rapidly. Greg, leaping from his chair, hung over it,
breathlessly.

"I think," he said, "we better slow down now. If we don't, we'll be
inside the planetary system."

"How far out is Craven?" asked Russ.

"Not far enough," Greg replied unhappily. "He can't be more than three
billion miles from the star and that star's hot. A class G, all right,
but a good deal younger than old Sol."

       *       *       *       *       *

"We'll let them know we've arrived," grinned Greg. He sent a stabbing
beam of half a billion horsepower slashing at the _Interplanetarian_.

The other ship staggered but steadied itself.

"They know," said Russ cryptically from his position in front of the
vision plate. "We shook them up a bit."

They waited. Nothing happened.

Greg scratched his head. "Maybe you were right. Maybe they don't want to
fight."

Together they watched the _Interplanetarian_. It was still moving in
toward the distant sun, as if nothing had happened.

"We'll see," said Greg.

Back at the controls he threw out a gigantic tractor beam, catching the
other ship in a net of forces that visibly cut its speed.

Space suddenly vomited lashing flame that slapped back and licked and
crawled in living streamers over the surface of the _Invincible_. The
engines moaned in their valiant battle to keep up the outer screen. The
pungent odor of ozone filtered into the control room. The whole ship was
bucking and vibrating, creaking, as if it were being pulled apart.

"So they don't want to fight, eh?" hooted Russ.

Greg gritted his teeth. "They snapped the tractor beam."

"They have power there," Russ declared.

"Too much," said Greg. "More power than they have any right to have."

His hand went out to the lever on the board and pulled it back. A beam
smashed out, with the engines' screaming drive behind it, billions of
horsepower driving with unleashed ferocity at the other ship.

Greg's hand spun a dial, while the generators roared thunderous
defiance.

"I'm giving them the radiation scale," said Greg.

The _Interplanetarian_ was staggering under the terrific bombardment,
but its screen was handling every ounce of the power that Greg was
pouring into it.

"Their photo-cells can't handle that," cried Russ. "No photo-cell would
handle all that stuff you're shooting at them. Unless ..."

"Unless what?"

"Unless Craven has improved on them."

"We'll have to find out. Get the televisor."

       *       *       *       *       *

Russ leaped for the television machine.

A moment later he lifted a haggard face.

"I can't get through," he said. "Craven's got our beams stopped and now
he has our television blocked out."

Greg nodded. "We might have expected that. When he could scramble our
televisors back in the Jovian worlds, he certainly ought to be able to
screen his ship against them."

He shoved the lever clear over, slamming the extreme limit of power
into the beam. The engines screamed like demented things, howling and
shrieking. Instantly a tremendous sheet of solid flame spun a fiery web
around the _Interplanetarian_, turning it into a blazing inferno of
lapping, leaping fire.

A dozen terrific beams, billions of horsepower in each, stabbed back at
the _Invincible_ as the _Interplanetarian_ shunted the terrific energy
influx from the overcharged accumulators to the various automatic energy
discharges.

The _Invincible's_ screen flared in defense and the ten great engines
wailed in utter agony. More stabbing flame shot from the
_Interplanetarian_ in slow explosions.

The temperature in the _Invincible's_ control room was rising. The ozone
was sharp enough to make their eyes water and nostrils burn. The vision
glass was blanked out by the lapping flames that crawled and writhed
over the screen outside the glass.

Russ tore his collar open, wiped his face with his shirt sleeve. "Try a
pure magnetic!"

Greg, his face set and bleak as a wall of stone, grunted agreement. His
fingers danced over the control manual.

Suddenly the stars outside twisted and danced, like stars gone mad, as
if they were dancing a riotous jig in space, some uproariously hopping
up and down while others were applauding the show that was being
provided for their unblinking eyes.

The magnetic field was tightening now, twisting the light from those
distant stars and bending it straight again. The _Interplanetarian_
reeled like a drunken thing and the great arcs of electric flame looped
madly and plunged straight for the field's very heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

The stars danced weirdly in far-off space again as the
_Interplanetarian's_ accumulators lashed out with tremendous force to
oppose the energy of the field.

The field glowed softly and disappeared.

"They have us stopped at every turn," groaned Russ. "There must be some
way, something we can do." He looked at Greg. Greg grinned without
humor, wiping his face. "There is something we can do," said Russ
grimly. "We should have thought of it long ago."

He strode to the desk, reached out one hand and drew a calculator near.

"You keep them busy," he snapped. "I'll have this thing figured out in
just a while."

From the engine rooms came the roar and hum of the laboring units and
the _Invincible_ shuddered once again as Greg grimly hurled one beam
after another, at the _Interplanetarian_.

The _Interplanetarian_ struck back, using radio frequency that flamed
fiercely against the _Invincible's_ outer screen. Simultaneously the
_Interplanetarian_ leaped forward with a sudden surge of accumulated
energy, driving at the star that lay not more than three billion miles
away.

Greg worked desperately, cursing under his breath. He pulled down the
outer screen that was fighting directly against the radio frequency,
energy for energy, and allowed the beam to strike squarely on the second
screen, the inversion field that shunted the major portion of the energy
impacting against it through 90 degrees into another space.

The engines moaned softly and settled into a quieter rumble as the
necessity of supplying the first screen was eliminated. But they
screamed once again as Greg sent out a tractor beam that seized and
held, dragged the _Interplanetarian_ to a standstill. Craven's ship had
gained millions of miles, though, and established a tremendous advantage
by fighting nearer to its source of energy.

"Russ," gasped Greg, "if you don't get that scheme of yours figured out
pretty soon, we're done for. They've stopped everything we've got.
They're nearer the sun. We won't stand a chance if they make another
break like that."

Russ glanced up to answer, but his mouth fell open in amazement and he
did not speak. A streak of terrible light was striking at them from the
_Interplanetarian_, blinding white light, and along that highway of
light swarmed a horde of little green figures, like squirming green
amebas. Swarming toward the _Invincible_, stretching out hungry,
pale-green pseudopods toward the inversion barrier ... _and eating
through it_!

Wherever they touched, holes appeared. They drifted through the
inversion screen easily and began drilling into the inner screen of
anti-entropy. Eating their way into the anti-entropy ... _into a state
of matter which Russ and Greg had thought would resist all change_!

       *       *       *       *       *

For seconds both men stood transfixed, unable to believe the evidence of
their eyes. But the ameba things came on in ever-increasing throngs,
creatures that gnawed and slobbered at the anti-entropy, eating into it,
flaking it away, drilling their way through it.

When they pierced the anti-entropy, they would cut through the steel
plates of the _Invincible_ like so much paper!

And more were coming. More and more!

With a grunt of amazement, Greg slammed a beam straight into the heart
of the amebas. They ate the beam and vanished as mistily as before,
little glowing things that ate and died. But there were always more to
take their place. They overwhelmed the beam and ate back along its
length, attacked the screen again.

They ate through walls of force and walls of metal, and a rush of
hissing air began to flame into ions in the terrific battle of energies
outside the _Invincible_.

Russ was crouching over the manual of the televisor board. His breath
moaned in his throat as his fingers flew.

"I have to have power, Greg," he said. "Lots of power."

"Take it." Greg replied. "I haven't been able to do anything with it. It
isn't any use to me."

Russ's thumb reached out and tripped the activating lever. The giant
engines shrieked and yowled.

Something was happening on the television screen ... something
terrifying. Craven's ship seemed to retreat suddenly for millions of
miles ... and as suddenly the _Invincible_ appeared on the screen. For a
single flashing instant, the view held; then it was gone in blank
grayness. For seconds nothing happened on the screen, unnerving seconds
while the two men held their breath.

The screen's grayness fled and they looked into the control room of the
_Interplanetarian_. Craven was hunched in a chair, intent upon a series
of controls. Behind him and to one side stood Stutsman, a heat pistol
dangled from his hand, his face twisted into a sneer of triumph. There
was no sign of Chambers.

"You damn fool," Craven was snapping at Stutsman. "You're cheating us
out of the only chance we ever had of getting home."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Shut up," snarled Stutsman, the pistol jerking in his hand. "Have you
got that apparatus on full power?"

"It's been on full power for minutes now," said Craven. "It must be
eating holes straight through Manning's ship."

"See you keep it that way. I really don't need you any more, anyhow.
I've watched and I know all the tricks. I could carry on this battle
single-handed."

Craven did not reply, merely hunched closer over the controls, eyes
watching flickering dials.

Greg jogged Russ's elbow. "That must be the apparatus over there, in the
corner of the room. That triangular affair. A condenser of some sort.
That stuff they're throwing at us must be super-saturated force fields
and they'd need a space-field condenser for that."

Russ nodded. "We'll take care of that."

His fingers moved swiftly and a transport beam whipped out, riding the
television beam. Bands of force wrapped around the triangular machine
and wrenched viciously. In the screen the apparatus disappeared ...
simply was gone. It now lay within the _Invincible's_ control room,
jerked there by the tele-transport.

The flood of dazzling light reaching out from the _Interplanetarian_
snapped off and the little green ameba things were gone. The shrill
whistle of escaping air stopped as the eaten screens clamped down again,
sealing in the atmosphere despite the holes bored through the metal
plates.

In the television screen, Craven leaped from his chair, was staring with
Stutsman at the place where the concentrator had stood. The machine had
been ripped from a welded base and jagged, bright, torn metal gleamed in
the control room lights. Snapped cables and broken busbars lay piled
about the room.

"What happened?" Stutsman was screaming. They heard Craven laugh at the
terror in the other's voice. "Manning just walked in and grabbed it away
from us."

"But he couldn't! We had the screen up! He couldn't get through!"

Craven shrugged his shoulders. "I don't know how he did it, but he did.
Probably he could clean out the whole place if he wanted to."

"That's a good idea," said Russ, judiciously.

He stripped bank after bank of the other ship's photo-cells from their
moorings, wrecked the force field controls, ripped cables from the
engines and left the ship without means of collecting power, without
means of using power, without means of movement, of offense or defense.

       *       *       *       *       *

He leaned back in his chair and regarded the screen with deep
satisfaction.

"That," he decided, "should hold them for a while."

He hauled the pipe out of his pocket and filled it from the battered
leather pouch.

Greg regarded him with a quizzical stare. "You sent the televisor back
in time. You got it inside the _Interplanetarian_ before Craven had run
up his screen and then you brought it forward."

"You guessed it," said Russ, tamping the tobacco into the bowl. "We
should have thought of that long ago. We have a time factor there. In
fact, the whole thing revolves around time. We move the televisor, we
use the tele-transport, by giving the objects we wish to move an
acceleration in time."

Greg wrinkled his brow. "Maybe that means we can really investigate the
past, or even the future. Can sit here before our screen and see
everything that has happened, everything that is going to happen."

Russ shook his head. "I don't know, Greg. Notice, though, that we got no
screen response until the televisor came up out of the past and actually
reached the point which coincided with the present. That is, the screen
and the televisor itself have to be on the same time level for them to
operate. We might modify the screen, even modify the televisor so that
we could travel in time, but it will take a lot of research, a lot of
work. And especially it will take a whale of a lot of power."

"We have the power," said Greg.

Russ moved the lighter back and forth over the tobacco, igniting it
carefully. Clouds of blue smoke swirled around his head. He spoke out of
the smoke.

"Right now," he said, "we better see how Craven and our other friends
are getting along. I didn't like the way Stutsman was talking or the way
he was swinging that gun around. And Chambers wasn't anywhere in sight.
There's something screwy about the entire thing."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What are we going to do now?" demanded Stutsman.

Craven grinned at him. "That's up to you. Remember, you're the master
mind around here. You took over and said you were going to run things."
He waved a casual hand at the shattered machines, the ripped-out
apparatus. "Well, there you are. Go ahead and run the joint."

"But you will have to help," pleaded Stutsman, his face twisted until it
seemed that he was suffering intense physical agony. "You know what to
do. I don't."

Craven shook his head. "There isn't any use starting. Manning will be
along almost anytime now. We'll wait and see what he has in mind."

"Manning!" shrieked Stutsman, waving the pistol wildly. "Always Manning.
One would think you were working for Manning."

"He's the big shot out in this little corner of space right now," Craven
pointed out. "There isn't any way you can get around that."

Stutsman backed carefully away. His gun came up and he looked at Craven
appraisingly, as if selecting his targets.

"Put down that gun," said a voice.

Gregory Manning stood between Stutsman and Craven. There had been no
foggy forerunner of his appearance. He had just snapped out of empty
air.

Stutsman stared at him, his eyes widening, but the gun remained steady
in his hand.

"Look out, Craven," warned Greg. "He's going to fire and it will go
right through me and hit you."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was the thump of a falling body as Craven hurled himself out of
his chair, hit the floor and rolled. Stutsman's gun vomited flame. The
spouting flame passed through Greg's image, blasted against the chair in
which Craven had sat, fused it until it fell in on itself.

"Russ," said Greg quietly, "disarm this fellow before he hurts
somebody."

An unseen force reached out and twisted the gun from Stutsman's hand,
flung it to one side. Swiftly Stutsman's hands were forced behind his
back and held there by invisible bonds.

Stutsman cried out, tried to struggle, but he was unable to move. It was
as if giant hands had gripped him, were holding him in a viselike
clutch.

"Thanks, Manning," said Craven, getting up off the floor. "The fool
would have shot this time. He's threatened it for days. He has been
developing a homicidal mania."

"We don't need to worry about him now," declared Greg. He turned around
to face Craven. "Where's Chambers?"

"Stutsman locked him up," said Craven. "I imagine he has the key in his
pocket. Locked him up in the stateroom. Chambers jumped him and tried to
take the gun away from him and Stutsman laid him out, hit him over the
head. He kept Chambers locked up after that. Hasn't allowed anyone to go
near the room. Hasn't even given him food and water. That was three days
ago."

"Get the key out of his pocket," directed Greg. "Go and see how Chambers
is."

Alone in the control room with Stutsman, Greg looked at him.

"I have a score to settle with you, Stutsman," he said. "I had intended
to let it ride, but not now."

"You can't touch me," blustered Stutsman. "You wouldn't dare."

"What makes you think I wouldn't?"

"You're bluffing. You've got a lot of tricks, but you can't do the
things you would like me to think you can. You've got Chambers and
Craven fooled, but not me."

"It may be that I can offer you definite proof."

Chambers staggered over the threshold. His clothing was rumpled. A rude
bandage was wound around his head. His face was haggard and his eyes
red.

"Hello, Manning," he said. "I suppose you've won. The Solar System must
be in your control by now."

He lifted his hand to his mustache, brushed it, a feeble attempt at
playing the old role he'd acted so long.

"We've won," said Greg quietly, "but you're wrong about our being in
control. The governments are in the hands of the people, where they
should be."

Chambers nodded. "I see," he mumbled. "Different people, different
ideas." His eyes rested on Stutsman and Greg saw sudden rage sweep
across the gray, haggard face. "So you've got him, have you? What are
you going to do with him? What are you going to do with all of us?"

"I haven't had time to think about it," said Greg. "I've principally
been thinking about Stutsman here."

"He mutinied," rasped Chambers. "He seized the ship, turned the crew
against me."

"And the penalty for that," said Greg, quietly, "is death. Death by
walking in space."

Stutsman writhed within the bands of force that held him tight. His face
contorted. "No, damn you! You can't do that! Not to me, you can't!"

"Shut up," roared Chambers and Stutsman quieted.

"I was thinking, too," said Greg, "that at his order thousands of people
were mercilessly shot down back in the Solar System. Stood against a
wall and mowed down. Others were killed like wild animals in the street.
Thousands of them."

       *       *       *       *       *

He moved slowly toward Stutsman and the man cringed.

"Stutsman," he said, "you're a butcher. You're a stench in the nostrils
of humanity. You aren't fit to live."

"Those," said Craven, "are my sentiments exactly."

"You hate me," screamed Stutsman. "All of you hate me. You are doing
this because you hate me."

"Everyone hates you, Stutsman," said Greg. "Every living person hates
you. You have a cloud of hate hanging over you as black and wide as
space."

The man closed his eyes, trying to break free of the bonds.

"Bring me a spacesuit," snapped Greg, watching Stutsman's face.

Craven brought it and dropped it at Stutsman's feet.

"All right, Russ," said Greg. "Turn him loose."

Stutsman swayed and almost fell as the bands of force released him.

"Get into that suit," ordered Greg.

Stutsman hesitated, but something he saw in Greg's face made him lift
the suit, step into it, fasten it about his body.

"What are you going to do with me?" he whimpered. "You aren't going to
take me back to Earth again, are you? You aren't going to make me stand
trial?"

"No," said Greg, gravely, "we aren't taking you back to Earth. And
you're standing trial right now."

Stutsman read his fate in the cold eyes that stared into his. Chattering
frightenedly, he rushed at Greg, plunged through him, collided with the
wall of the ship and toppled over, feebly attempting to rise.

Invisible hands hoisted him to his feet, gripped him, held him upright.
Greg walked toward him, stood facing him.

"Stutsman," he said, "you have four hours of air. That will give you
four hours to think, to make your peace with death." He turned toward
the other two. Chambers nodded grimly. Craven said nothing.

"And now," said Greg to Craven, "if you will fasten down his helmet."

The helmet clanged shut, shutting out the pleas and threats that came
from Stutsman's throat.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stutsman saw distant stars, cruel, gleaming eyes that glared at him.
Empty space fell away on all sides.

Numbed by fear, he realized where he was. Manning had picked him up and
thrown him far into space ... out into that waste where for hundreds of
light years there was only the awful nothingness of space.

He was less than a speck of dust, in this great immensity of emptiness.
There was no up or down, no means of orientation.

Loneliness and terror closed in on him, a terrible agony of fear. In
four hours his air would be gone and then he would die! His body would
swirl and eddy through this great cosmic ocean. It would never be found.
It would remain here, embalmed by the cold of space, until the last clap
of eternity.

There was one way, the easy way. His hand reached up and grasped the
connection between his helmet and the air tank. One wrench and he would
die swiftly, quickly ... instead of letting death stalk him through the
darkness for the next four hours.

He shivered and his hand loosened its hold, dropped away. He was afraid
to hasten death. He wanted to put it off. He was afraid of death ...
horribly afraid.

The stars mocked him and he seemed to hear hooting laughter from
somewhere far away. Curiously, it sounded like his own laughter....

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'll make it easy for you, Manning," Chambers said. "I know that all of
us are guilty. Guilty in the eyes of the people and the law. Guilty in
your eyes. If we had won, there would have been no penalty. There's
never a penalty for the one who wins."

"Penalty," said Greg, his eyes half smiling. "Why, yes, I think there
is. I'm going to order you aboard the _Invincible_ for something to eat
and to get some rest."

"You mean to say that we aren't prisoners?"

Greg shook his head. "Not prisoners," he said. "Why, I came out here to
guide you back to Earth. I hauled you out here and got you into this
jam. It was up to me to get you out of it. I would have done the same
for Stutsman, too, but ..."

He hesitated and looked at Chambers.

Chambers stared back and slowly nodded.

"Yes, Manning," he said. "I think I understand."




_CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE_


Chambers lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair.

"I wish you could see it my way, Manning," he said. "There's no place
for me on Earth, no place for me in the Solar System. You see, I tried
and failed. I'm just a has-been back there."

He laughed quietly. "Somehow, I can't imagine myself coming back in the
role of the defeated tribal leader, chained to your chariot, so to
speak."

"But it wouldn't be that way," protested Greg. "Your company is gone,
true, and your stocks are worthless, but you haven't lost everything.
You still have a fleet of ships. With our new power, the Solar System
will especially need ships. Lots of ships. For the spacelanes will be
filled with commerce. You'd be coming back to a new deal, a new Solar
System, a place that has been transformed almost overnight by power
that's practically free."

"Yes, yes, I know all that," said Chambers. "But I climbed too high. I
got too big. I can't come back now as something small, a failure."

"You have things we need," said Greg. "The screen that blankets out our
television and tele-transport, for example. We need your screen as a
safeguard against the very thing we have created. Think of what criminal
uses could be made of the tele-transport. No vault, no net of charged
wires, nothing, could stop a thief from taking anything he wanted.
Prisons would cease to be prisons. Criminals could reach in and pick up
their friends, no matter how many guards there were. Prisons and bank
vaults and national treasuries could be cleaned out in a single day."

"Then there's the super-saturated space fields," added Russ, ruefully.
"Those almost got us. If I hadn't thought of moving the televisor
through time, we would have had to pull stakes and run for it."

"No, you wouldn't," pointed out Craven. "You could have wiped us out in
a moment. You can disintegrate matter. Send it up in a puff of smoke ...
rip every electron apart and send it hurtling away."

"Of course we could have, Craven," said Greg, "but we wouldn't."

Chambers laughed softly. "Not quite mad enough at us to do that, eh?"

Greg looked at him. "I guess that must have been it."

"But I'm curious about the green space fields," persisted Russ.

"Simple," said Craven. "They were just fields that had more energy
packed into a certain portion of space than space could take. Space
fields that had far more than their share of energy, more than they
could hold. A super-saturated solution will crystalize almost
immediately onto the tiniest crystal put into it. Those fields acted the
same way. They crystalized instantly into hyper-space the moment they
came into contact with other energy, whether as photons of radiation,
matter or other space fields. Your anti-entropy didn't stand a chance
under those conditions. When they crystalized, they took a chunk of the
field along with them, a small chunk, but one after another they ate a
hole right through your screen."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Something like that would have a commercial value," said Greg. "Useful
in war, too, and now that mankind has taken to space, now that we're
spreading out, we must think of possible attack. There must be life on
other planets throughout the Galaxy. Someday they'll come. If they
don't, someday we'll go to them. And we may need every type of armament
we can get our hands on."

Chambers knocked the ash off his cigar and was staring out the vision
port. The ship had swung so that through the port could be seen the
distant star toward which the _Interplanetarian_ had been driving.

"For my part," said Chambers, slowly, measuring each word, "you can have
those findings of ours. We'll give them to you, knowing you will use
them as they should be used. Craven can tell you how they work. That is,
if Craven wants to. He is the man who developed them."

"Certainly," said Craven. "They'll be something to remember us by."

       *       *       *       *       *

"But you are coming back with us, aren't you?" asked Greg.

Craven shook his head. "No, I'm going with Chambers. I don't know what
he's thinking of, but whatever it is, it's all right with me. We've been
together too long. I'd miss someone to fight with."

Chambers was still staring out the vision port. He was talking, but he
did not seem to be talking to them.

"I had a dream, you see. I saw the people struggling against the
inefficiency and stupidity of popular government. I saw the periodic
rise of bad leaders. I saw them lead the people into blunders. I read
history and I saw that since the time man had risen from the ape, this
had been going on. So I proposed to give the people scientific
government ... a business administration. An administration that would
have run the government exactly as a successful businessman runs his
business. The people would have resented it if I had told them they
didn't know how to run their affairs. There was only one way to do
it ... gain control and force it down their throats."

Chambers was no longer a beaten man, no longer a man with a white
bandage around his head and his power stripped from him. Once again he
was the fighting financier who had sat back at the desk in the
Interplanetary building on Earth and issued orders ... orders that sped
across millions of miles of space.

He shrugged his shoulders. "They didn't want it. Man doesn't want to
live under scientific government. He doesn't want to be protected
against blunders. He wants what he calls freedom. The right to do the
things he wants to do, even if it means making a damn fool of himself.
The right to rise to great heights and tumble to equally low depths.
That's human nature and I ruled it out. But you can't rule out human
nature."

They sat in silence, no one speaking. Russ cupped his pipe bowl in his
hand and watched Chambers. Chambers leaned back and slowly puffed at
the cigar. Greg just sat, his face unchanging.

Craven finally broke the silence. "Just what are you planning to do?"

Chambers flicked his hand toward the distant sun that gleamed through
the vision port.

"There's a new solar system out there," he said. "New worlds, a new sun.
A place to start over again. You and I discovered it. It's ours by right
of discovery. We'll go there and stake out our claim."

"But there may be nothing there," protested Greg. "That sun is younger
than our Sun. The planets may not have cooled as yet. Life may not have
developed."

"In such a case," said Chambers, "we shall find another planetary system
around another sun. A system that has cooled, where there is life."

Russ gasped. Here was something important, something that should set a
precedent. The first men to roam from star to star seeking new worlds.
The first men to turn their backs on the old solar system and strike out
in search of new worlds swinging in their paths around distant suns.

Greg was saying, "All right, if that's the way you want it. I was hoping
you'd come back with us. But we'll help you repair your ship. We'll give
you all the supplies we can spare."

Russ rose to his feet. "That," he said, "calls for a little drink."

He opened a cabinet and took out bottles and glasses.

"Only three," said Chambers. "Craven doesn't drink."

Craven interrupted. "Pour one for me, too, Page."

Chambers looked at the scientist, astounded. "I never knew you to take a
drink in your life."

Craven twisted his face into a grin. "This is a special occasion."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Invincible_ was nearing Mars, heading for Earth, which was still a
greenish sphere far to one side of the flaming Sun.

Russ watched the little green globe, thinking.

Earth was home. To him it always would be home. But that would be
changed soon. Just a few more generations, and, to millions upon
millions of human beings, Earth no longer would be home.

With the new material energy engines, life on every planet would be
possible now, even easy. The cost of manufacture, mining, shipping
across the vast distances between the planets would be only a fraction
of what it had been when man had been forced to rely upon the unwieldy,
expensive accumulator system of supplying life-giving power.

Now Mars would have power of her own. Even Pluto could generate her own.
And power was ... well, it was power. The power to live, the power to
work, to establish and maintain commerce, to adjust gravity to Earth
standard or to any standard. The power to remake and reshape and rebuild
planetary conditions to suit man exactly.

Earthmen and Earthwomen would be moving out en masse now to the new and
virgin fields of endeavor--to the farms of Venus, to the manufacturing
centers that were springing up on Mars, to the mines of the Jovian
worlds, to the great laboratory plants that would spring up on Titan and
on Pluto and on the other colder worlds.

The migration of races had started long ago. In the Old Stone Age, the
Cro-Magnon had swept out of nowhere to oust the Neanderthal. Centuries
later the barbarians of the north, in another of those restless
migrations, had overwhelmed and swept away the Roman Empire. And many
centuries later, migration had turned from Europe to a new world across
the sea, and fighting Americans had battled their way from east to west,
conquering a continent.

And now another great migration was on--man was leaving the Earth,
moving into space. He was leaving behind him the world that had reared
and fostered him. He was striking out and out. First the planets would
be overrun, and then man would leap from the planets to the stars!

       *       *       *       *       *

For years after America had become a country, had built a tradition of
her own, Europe was regarded by millions as the homeland. But as the
years swept by, this had ceased to be and the Americas were a world unto
themselves, owing nothing to Europe.

And that was the way it would be with Earth. For centuries, for
thousands of years, Earth would be the Mother Planet, the homeland for
all the millions of roaming men and women who dared the gulfs of space
and the strangeness of new worlds. There would be trips back to the
Earth for sentimental reasons ... to see the place where one's ancestors
were born and had lived, to goggle at the monument which marked the
point from which the first spaceship had taken off for the Moon, to
visit old museums and see old cities and breathe the air that men and
women had breathed for thousands of years before they found the power to
take them anywhere.

In the end, Earth would be just a worn-out planet. Even now her
minerals were rapidly being exhausted; her oil wells were dry and all
her coal was mined; her industry stabilized and filled; her businesses
interlocking and highly competitive. A world that was too full, that had
too many things, too many activities, too many people. A world that
didn't need men and women. A world where even genius was kept from
rising to the top.

And this was what was driving mankind away from the Earth. The
competition, the crowded conditions, in business and industrial fields,
the lack of opportunity for new development, the everlasting struggle to
get ahead, fighting for a place to live when millions of others were
fighting for the same thing. But not entirely that, not that alone.
There was something else--that old adventuresome spirit, the driving
urge to face new dangers, to step over old frontiers, to do and dare, to
make a damn fool of one's self, or to surpass the greatest
accomplishments of history.

But Earth would never die, for there was a part of Earth in every man
and woman who would go forth into space, part of Earth's courage, part
of Earth's ideals, part of Earth's dreams. The habits and the virtues
and the faults that Earth had spawned and fostered ... these were things
that would never die. Old Earth would live forever. Even when she was
drifting dust and the Sun was a dead, cold star, Earth would live on in
the courage and the dreams that by that time would be spreading to the
far corners of the Galaxy.

Russ dug the pipe out of his pocket, searched for the pouch, found it on
the desk behind him. It was empty.

"Hell," he said, "my tobacco's all gone."

Greg grinned. "You won't have to wait long. We'll be back on Earth in a
few more hours."

Russ put the stem between his teeth, bit down on it savagely. "I guess
that's right. I can dry smoke her until we get there."

Earth was larger now. Mars had swung astern.

Suddenly a winking light stabbed out into space from the night side of
Earth. Signaling ... signaling ... clearing the spacelanes for a greater
future than any human prophet had ever predicted.


The End





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Empire, by Clifford Donald Simak

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMPIRE ***

***** This file should be named 28215.txt or 28215.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/2/1/28215/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man with Two Left Feet, by P. G. Wodehouse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Man with Two Left Feet
       and Other Stories

Author: P. G. Wodehouse

Posting Date: March 6, 2010 [EBook #7471]
Release Date: February, 2005
First Posted: May 6, 2003
Last Updated: October 19, 2004

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WITH TWO LEFT FEET ***




Produced by Suzanne L. Shell, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team










THE MAN WITH TWO LEFT FEET

_and Other Stories_




by P. G. WODEHOUSE

1917





CONTENTS


BILL THE BLOODHOUND

EXTRICATING YOUNG GUSSIE

WILTON'S HOLIDAY

THE MIXER--I

THE MIXER--II

CROWNED HEADS

AT GEISENHEIMER'S

THE MAKING OF MAC'S

ONE TOUCH OF NATURE

BLACK FOR LUCK

THE ROMANCE OF AN UGLY POLICEMAN

A SEA OF TROUBLES

THE MAN WITH TWO LEFT FEET




BILL THE BLOODHOUND


There's a divinity that shapes our ends. Consider the case of Henry
Pifield Rice, detective.

I must explain Henry early, to avoid disappointment. If I simply said
he was a detective, and let it go at that, I should be obtaining the
reader's interest under false pretences. He was really only a sort of
detective, a species of sleuth. At Stafford's International
Investigation Bureau, in the Strand, where he was employed, they did
not require him to solve mysteries which had baffled the police. He had
never measured a footprint in his life, and what he did not know about
bloodstains would have filled a library. The sort of job they gave
Henry was to stand outside a restaurant in the rain, and note what time
someone inside left it. In short, it is not 'Pifield Rice,
Investigator. No. 1.--The Adventure of the Maharajah's Ruby' that I
submit to your notice, but the unsensational doings of a quite
commonplace young man, variously known to his comrades at the Bureau as
'Fathead', 'That blighter what's-his-name', and 'Here, you!'

Henry lived in a boarding-house in Guildford Street. One day a new girl
came to the boarding-house, and sat next to Henry at meals. Her name
was Alice Weston. She was small and quiet, and rather pretty. They got
on splendidly. Their conversation, at first confined to the weather and
the moving-pictures, rapidly became more intimate. Henry was surprised
to find that she was on the stage, in the chorus. Previous chorus-girls
at the boarding-house had been of a more pronounced type--good girls,
but noisy, and apt to wear beauty-spots. Alice Weston was different.

'I'm rehearsing at present,' she said. 'I'm going out on tour next
month in "The Girl From Brighton". What do you do, Mr Rice?'

Henry paused for a moment before replying. He knew how sensational he
was going to be.

'I'm a detective.'

Usually, when he told girls his profession, squeaks of amazed
admiration greeted him. Now he was chagrined to perceive in the brown
eyes that met his distinct disapproval.

'What's the matter?' he said, a little anxiously, for even at this
early stage in their acquaintance he was conscious of a strong desire
to win her approval. 'Don't you like detectives?'

'I don't know. Somehow I shouldn't have thought you were one.'

This restored Henry's equanimity somewhat. Naturally a detective does
not want to look like a detective and give the whole thing away right
at the start.

'I think--you won't be offended?'

'Go on.'

'I've always looked on it as rather a _sneaky_ job.'

'Sneaky!' moaned Henry.

'Well, creeping about, spying on people.'

Henry was appalled. She had defined his own trade to a nicety. There
might be detectives whose work was above this reproach, but he was a
confirmed creeper, and he knew it. It wasn't his fault. The boss told
him to creep, and he crept. If he declined to creep, he would be sacked
_instanter_. It was hard, and yet he felt the sting of her words,
and in his bosom the first seeds of dissatisfaction with his occupation
took root.

You might have thought that this frankness on the girl's part would
have kept Henry from falling in love with her. Certainly the dignified
thing would have been to change his seat at table, and take his meals
next to someone who appreciated the romance of detective work a little
more. But no, he remained where he was, and presently Cupid, who never
shoots with a surer aim than through the steam of boarding-house hash,
sniped him where he sat.

He proposed to Alice Weston. She refused him.

'It's not because I'm not fond of you. I think you're the nicest man I
ever met.' A good deal of assiduous attention had enabled Henry to win
this place in her affections. He had worked patiently and well before
actually putting his fortune to the test. 'I'd marry you tomorrow if
things were different. But I'm on the stage, and I mean to stick there.
Most of the girls want to get off it, but not me. And one thing I'll
never do is marry someone who isn't in the profession. My sister
Genevieve did, and look what happened to her. She married a commercial
traveller, and take it from me he travelled. She never saw him for more
than five minutes in the year, except when he was selling gent's
hosiery in the same town where she was doing her refined speciality,
and then he'd just wave his hand and whiz by, and start travelling
again. My husband has got to be close by, where I can see him. I'm
sorry, Henry, but I know I'm right.'

It seemed final, but Henry did not wholly despair. He was a resolute
young man. You have to be to wait outside restaurants in the rain for
any length of time.

He had an inspiration. He sought out a dramatic agent.

'I want to go on the stage, in musical comedy.'

'Let's see you dance.'

'I can't dance.'

'Sing,' said the agent. 'Stop singing,' added the agent, hastily.

'You go away and have a nice cup of hot tea,' said the agent,
soothingly, 'and you'll be as right as anything in the morning.'

Henry went away.

A few days later, at the Bureau, his fellow-detective Simmonds hailed
him.

'Here, you! The boss wants you. Buck up!'

Mr Stafford was talking into the telephone. He replaced the receiver as
Henry entered.

'Oh, Rice, here's a woman wants her husband shadowed while he's on the
road. He's an actor. I'm sending you. Go to this address, and get
photographs and all particulars. You'll have to catch the eleven
o'clock train on Friday.'

'Yes, sir.'

'He's in "The Girl From Brighton" company. They open at Bristol.'

It sometimes seemed to Henry as if Fate did it on purpose. If the
commission had had to do with any other company, it would have been
well enough, for, professionally speaking, it was the most important
with which he had ever been entrusted. If he had never met Alice
Weston, and heard her views upon detective work, he would have been
pleased and flattered. Things being as they were, it was Henry's
considered opinion that Fate had slipped one over on him.

In the first place, what torture to be always near her, unable to
reveal himself; to watch her while she disported herself in the company
of other men. He would be disguised, and she would not recognize him;
but he would recognize her, and his sufferings would be dreadful.

In the second place, to have to do his creeping about and spying
practically in her presence--

Still, business was business.

At five minutes to eleven on the morning named he was at the station, a
false beard and spectacles shielding his identity from the public eye.
If you had asked him he would have said that he was a Scotch business
man. As a matter of fact, he looked far more like a motor-car coming
through a haystack.

The platform was crowded. Friends of the company had come to see the
company off. Henry looked on discreetly from behind a stout porter,
whose bulk formed a capital screen. In spite of himself, he was
impressed. The stage at close quarters always thrilled him. He
recognized celebrities. The fat man in the brown suit was Walter
Jelliffe, the comedian and star of the company. He stared keenly at him
through the spectacles. Others of the famous were scattered about. He
saw Alice. She was talking to a man with a face like a hatchet, and
smiling, too, as if she enjoyed it. Behind the matted foliage which he
had inflicted on his face, Henry's teeth came together with a snap.

In the weeks that followed, as he dogged 'The Girl From Brighton'
company from town to town, it would be difficult to say whether Henry
was happy or unhappy. On the one hand, to realize that Alice was so
near and yet so inaccessible was a constant source of misery; yet, on
the other, he could not but admit that he was having the very dickens
of a time, loafing round the country like this.

He was made for this sort of life, he considered. Fate had placed him
in a London office, but what he really enjoyed was this unfettered
travel. Some gipsy strain in him rendered even the obvious discomforts
of theatrical touring agreeable. He liked catching trains; he liked
invading strange hotels; above all, he revelled in the artistic
pleasure of watching unsuspecting fellow-men as if they were so many
ants.

That was really the best part of the whole thing. It was all very well
for Alice to talk about creeping and spying, but, if you considered it
without bias, there was nothing degrading about it at all. It was an
art. It took brains and a genius for disguise to make a man a
successful creeper and spyer. You couldn't simply say to yourself, 'I
will creep.' If you attempted to do it in your own person, you would be
detected instantly. You had to be an adept at masking your personality.
You had to be one man at Bristol and another quite different man at
Hull--especially if, like Henry, you were of a gregarious disposition,
and liked the society of actors.

The stage had always fascinated Henry. To meet even minor members of
the profession off the boards gave him a thrill. There was a resting
juvenile, of fit-up calibre, at his boarding-house who could always get
a shilling out of him simply by talking about how he had jumped in and
saved the show at the hamlets which he had visited in the course of his
wanderings. And on this 'Girl From Brighton' tour he was in constant
touch with men who really amounted to something. Walter Jelliffe had
been a celebrity when Henry was going to school; and Sidney Crane, the
baritone, and others of the lengthy cast, were all players not unknown
in London. Henry courted them assiduously.

It had not been hard to scrape acquaintance with them. The principals
of the company always put up at the best hotel, and--his expenses being
paid by his employer--so did Henry. It was the easiest thing possible
to bridge with a well-timed whisky-and-soda the gulf between
non-acquaintance and warm friendship. Walter Jelliffe, in particular,
was peculiarly accessible. Every time Henry accosted him--as a
different individual, of course--and renewed in a fresh disguise the
friendship which he had enjoyed at the last town, Walter Jelliffe met
him more than half-way.

It was in the sixth week of the tour that the comedian, promoting him
from mere casual acquaintanceship, invited him to come up to his room
and smoke a cigar.

Henry was pleased and flattered. Jelliffe was a personage, always
surrounded by admirers, and the compliment was consequently of a high
order.

He lit his cigar. Among his friends at the Green-Room Club it was
unanimously held that Walter Jelliffe's cigars brought him within the
scope of the law forbidding the carrying of concealed weapons; but
Henry would have smoked the gift of such a man if it had been a
cabbage-leaf. He puffed away contentedly. He was made up as an old
Indian colonel that week, and he complimented his host on the aroma
with a fine old-world courtesy.

Walter Jelliffe seemed gratified.

'Quite comfortable?' he asked.

'Quite, I thank you,' said Henry, fondling his silver moustache.

'That's right. And now tell me, old man, which of us is it you're
trailing?'

Henry nearly swallowed his cigar.

'What do you mean?'

'Oh, come,' protested Jelliffe; 'there's no need to keep it up with me.
I know you're a detective. The question is, Who's the man you're after?
That's what we've all been wondering all this time.'

All! They had all been wondering! It was worse than Henry could have
imagined. Till now he had pictured his position with regard to 'The
Girl From Brighton' company rather as that of some scientist who,
seeing but unseen, keeps a watchful eye on the denizens of a drop of
water under his microscope. And they had all detected him--every one of
them.

It was a stunning blow. If there was one thing on which Henry prided
himself it was the impenetrability of his disguises. He might be slow;
he might be on the stupid side; but he could disguise himself. He had a
variety of disguises, each designed to befog the public more hopelessly
than the last.

Going down the street, you would meet a typical commercial traveller,
dapper and alert. Anon, you encountered a heavily bearded Australian.
Later, maybe, it was a courteous old retired colonel who stopped you
and inquired the way to Trafalgar Square. Still later, a rather flashy
individual of the sporting type asked you for a match for his cigar.
Would you have suspected for one instant that each of these widely
differing personalities was in reality one man?

Certainly you would.

Henry did not know it, but he had achieved in the eyes of the small
servant who answered the front-door bell at his boarding-house a
well-established reputation as a humorist of the more practical kind.
It was his habit to try his disguises on her. He would ring the bell,
inquire for the landlady, and when Bella had gone, leap up the stairs
to his room. Here he would remove the disguise, resume his normal
appearance, and come downstairs again, humming a careless air. Bella,
meanwhile, in the kitchen, would be confiding to her ally the cook that
'Mr Rice had jest come in, lookin' sort o' funny again'.

He sat and gaped at Walter Jelliffe. The comedian regarded him
curiously.

'You look at least a hundred years old,' he said. 'What are you made up
as? A piece of Gorgonzola?'

Henry glanced hastily at the mirror. Yes, he did look rather old. He
must have overdone some of the lines on his forehead. He looked
something between a youngish centenarian and a nonagenarian who had
seen a good deal of trouble.

'If you knew how you were demoralizing the company,' Jelliffe went on,
'you would drop it. As steady and quiet a lot of boys as ever you met
till you came along. Now they do nothing but bet on what disguise
you're going to choose for the next town. I don't see why you need to
change so often. You were all right as the Scotchman at Bristol. We
were all saying how nice you looked. You should have stuck to that. But
what do you do at Hull but roll in in a scrubby moustache and a tweed
suit, looking rotten. However, all that is beside the point. It's a
free country. If you like to spoil your beauty, I suppose there's no
law against it. What I want to know is, who's the man? Whose track are
you sniffing on, Bill? You'll pardon my calling you Bill. You're known
as Bill the Bloodhound in the company. Who's the man?'

'Never mind,' said Henry.

He was aware, as he made it, that it was not a very able retort, but he
was feeling too limp for satisfactory repartee. Criticisms in the
Bureau, dealing with his alleged solidity of skull, he did not resent.
He attributed them to man's natural desire to chaff his fellow-man. But
to be unmasked by the general public in this way was another matter. It
struck at the root of all things.

'But I do mind,' objected Jelliffe. 'It's most important. A lot of
money hangs on it. We've got a sweepstake on in the company, the holder
of the winning name to take the entire receipts. Come on. Who is he?'

Henry rose and made for the door. His feelings were too deep for words.
Even a minor detective has his professional pride; and the knowledge
that his espionage is being made the basis of sweepstakes by his quarry
cuts this to the quick.

'Here, don't go! Where are you going?'

'Back to London,' said Henry, bitterly. 'It's a lot of good my staying
here now, isn't it?'

'I should say it was--to me. Don't be in a hurry. You're thinking that,
now we know all about you, your utility as a sleuth has waned to some
extent. Is that it?'

'Well?'

'Well, why worry? What does it matter to you? You don't get paid by
results, do you? Your boss said "Trail along." Well, do it, then. I
should hate to lose you. I don't suppose you know it, but you've been
the best mascot this tour that I've ever come across. Right from the
start we've been playing to enormous business. I'd rather kill a black
cat than lose you. Drop the disguises, and stay with us. Come behind
all you want, and be sociable.'

A detective is only human. The less of a detective, the more human he
is. Henry was not much of a detective, and his human traits were
consequently highly developed. From a boy, he had never been able to
resist curiosity. If a crowd collected in the street he always added
himself to it, and he would have stopped to gape at a window with
'Watch this window' written on it, if he had been running for his life
from wild bulls. He was, and always had been, intensely desirous of
some day penetrating behind the scenes of a theatre.

And there was another thing. At last, if he accepted this invitation,
he would be able to see and speak to Alice Weston, and interfere with
the manoeuvres of the hatchet-faced man, on whom he had brooded with
suspicion and jealousy since that first morning at the station. To see
Alice! Perhaps, with eloquence, to talk her out of that ridiculous
resolve of hers!

'Why, there's something in that,' he said.

'Rather! Well, that's settled. And now, touching that sweep, who
_is_ it?'

'I can't tell you that. You see, so far as that goes, I'm just where I
was before. I can still watch--whoever it is I'm watching.'

'Dash it, so you can. I didn't think of that,' said Jelliffe, who
possessed a sensitive conscience. 'Purely between ourselves, it isn't
_me_, is it?'

Henry eyed him inscrutably. He could look inscrutable at times.

'Ah!' he said, and left quickly, with the feeling that, however poorly
he had shown up during the actual interview, his exit had been good. He
might have been a failure in the matter of disguise, but nobody could
have put more quiet sinister-ness into that 'Ah!' It did much to soothe
him and ensure a peaceful night's rest.

On the following night, for the first time in his life, Henry found
himself behind the scenes of a theatre, and instantly began to
experience all the complex emotions which come to the layman in that
situation. That is to say, he felt like a cat which has strayed into a
strange hostile back-yard. He was in a new world, inhabited by weird
creatures, who flitted about in an eerie semi-darkness, like brightly
coloured animals in a cavern.

'The Girl From Brighton' was one of those exotic productions specially
designed for the Tired Business Man. It relied for a large measure of
its success on the size and appearance of its chorus, and on their
constant change of costume. Henry, as a consequence, was the centre of
a kaleidoscopic whirl of feminine loveliness, dressed to represent
such varying flora and fauna as rabbits, Parisian students, colleens,
Dutch peasants, and daffodils. Musical comedy is the Irish stew of the
drama. Anything may be put into it, with the certainty that it will
improve the general effect.

He scanned the throng for a sight of Alice. Often as he had seen the
piece in the course of its six weeks' wandering in the wilderness he
had never succeeded in recognizing her from the front of the house.
Quite possibly, he thought, she might be on the stage already, hidden
in a rose-tree or some other shrub, ready at the signal to burst forth
upon the audience in short skirts; for in 'The Girl From Brighton'
almost anything could turn suddenly into a chorus-girl.

Then he saw her, among the daffodils. She was not a particularly
convincing daffodil, but she looked good to Henry. With wabbling knees
he butted his way through the crowd and seized her hand
enthusiastically.

'Why, Henry! Where did you come from?'

'I _am_ glad to see you!'

'How did you get here?'

'I _am_ glad to see you!'

At this point the stage-manager, bellowing from the prompt-box, urged
Henry to desist. It is one of the mysteries of behind-the-scenes
acoustics that a whisper from any minor member of the company can be
heard all over the house, while the stage-manager can burst himself
without annoying the audience.

Henry, awed by authority, relapsed into silence. From the unseen stage
came the sound of someone singing a song about the moon. June was also
mentioned. He recognized the song as one that had always bored him. He
disliked the woman who was singing it--a Miss Clarice Weaver, who
played the heroine of the piece to Sidney Crane's hero.

In his opinion he was not alone. Miss Weaver was not popular in the
company. She had secured the role rather as a testimony of personal
esteem from the management than because of any innate ability. She sang
badly, acted indifferently, and was uncertain what to do with her
hands. All these things might have been forgiven her, but she
supplemented them by the crime known in stage circles as 'throwing her
weight about'. That is to say, she was hard to please, and, when not
pleased, apt to say so in no uncertain voice. To his personal friends
Walter Jelliffe had frequently confided that, though not a rich man, he
was in the market with a substantial reward for anyone who was man
enough to drop a ton of iron on Miss Weaver.

Tonight the song annoyed Henry more than usual, for he knew that very
soon the daffodils were due on the stage to clinch the verisimilitude
of the scene by dancing the tango with the rabbits. He endeavoured to
make the most of the time at his disposal.

'I _am_ glad to see you!' he said.

'Sh-h!' said the stage-manager.

Henry was discouraged. Romeo could not have made love under these
conditions. And then, just when he was pulling himself together to
begin again, she was torn from him by the exigencies of the play.

He wandered moodily off into the dusty semi-darkness. He avoided the
prompt-box, whence he could have caught a glimpse of her, being loath
to meet the stage-manager just at present.

Walter Jelliffe came up to him, as he sat on a box and brooded on life.

'A little less of the double forte, old man,' he said. 'Miss Weaver has
been kicking about the noise on the side. She wanted you thrown out,
but I said you were my mascot, and I would die sooner than part with
you. But I should go easy on the chest-notes, I think, all the same.'

Henry nodded moodily. He was depressed. He had the feeling, which comes
so easily to the intruder behind the scenes, that nobody loved him.

The piece proceeded. From the front of the house roars of laughter
indicated the presence on the stage of Walter Jelliffe, while now and
then a lethargic silence suggested that Miss Clarice Weaver was in
action. From time to time the empty space about him filled with girls
dressed in accordance with the exuberant fancy of the producer of the
piece. When this happened, Henry would leap from his seat and endeavour
to locate Alice; but always, just as he thought he had done so, the
hidden orchestra would burst into melody and the chorus would be called
to the front.

It was not till late in the second act that he found an opportunity for
further speech.

The plot of 'The Girl From Brighton' had by then reached a critical
stage. The situation was as follows: The hero, having been disinherited
by his wealthy and titled father for falling in love with the heroine,
a poor shop-girl, has disguised himself (by wearing a different
coloured necktie) and has come in pursuit of her to a well-known
seaside resort, where, having disguised herself by changing her dress,
she is serving as a waitress in the Rotunda, on the Esplanade. The
family butler, disguised as a Bath-chair man, has followed the hero,
and the wealthy and titled father, disguised as an Italian
opera-singer, has come to the place for a reason which, though
extremely sound, for the moment eludes the memory. Anyhow, he is there,
and they all meet on the Esplanade. Each recognizes the other, but
thinks he himself is unrecognized. _Exeunt_ all, hurriedly,
leaving the heroine alone on the stage.

It is a crisis in the heroine's life. She meets it bravely. She sings a
song entitled 'My Honolulu Queen', with chorus of Japanese girls and
Bulgarian officers.

Alice was one of the Japanese girls.

She was standing a little apart from the other Japanese girls. Henry
was on her with a bound. Now was his time. He felt keyed up, full of
persuasive words. In the interval which had elapsed since their last
conversation yeasty emotions had been playing the dickens with his
self-control. It is practically impossible for a novice, suddenly
introduced behind the scenes of a musical comedy, not to fall in love
with somebody; and, if he is already in love, his fervour is increased
to a dangerous point.

Henry felt that it was now or never. He forgot that it was perfectly
possible--indeed, the reasonable course--to wait till the performance
was over, and renew his appeal to Alice to marry him on the way back to
her hotel. He had the feeling that he had got just about a quarter of a
minute. Quick action! That was Henry's slogan.

He seized her hand.

'Alice!'

'Sh-h!' hissed the stage-manager.

'Listen! I love you. I'm crazy about you. What does it matter whether
I'm on the stage or not? I love you.'

'Stop that row there!'

'Won't you marry me?'

She looked at him. It seemed to him that she hesitated.

'Cut it out!' bellowed the stage-manager, and Henry cut it out.

And at this moment, when his whole fate hung in the balance, there came
from the stage that devastating high note which is the sign that the
solo is over and that the chorus are now about to mobilize. As if drawn
by some magnetic power, she suddenly receded from him, and went on to
the stage.

A man in Henry's position and frame of mind is not responsible for his
actions. He saw nothing but her; he was blind to the fact that
important manoeuvres were in progress. All he understood was that she
was going from him, and that he must stop her and get this thing
settled.

He clutched at her. She was out of range, and getting farther away
every instant.

He sprang forward.

The advice that should be given to every young man starting life is--if
you happen to be behind the scenes at a theatre, never spring forward.
The whole architecture of the place is designed to undo those who so
spring. Hours before, the stage-carpenters have laid their traps, and
in the semi-darkness you cannot but fall into them.

The trap into which Henry fell was a raised board. It was not a very
highly-raised board. It was not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
church-door, but 'twas enough--it served. Stubbing it squarely with his
toe, Henry shot forward, all arms and legs.

It is the instinct of Man, in such a situation, to grab at the nearest
support. Henry grabbed at the Hotel Superba, the pride of the
Esplanade. It was a thin wooden edifice, and it supported him for
perhaps a tenth of a second. Then he staggered with it into the
limelight, tripped over a Bulgarian officer who was inflating himself
for a deep note, and finally fell in a complicated heap as exactly in
the centre of the stage as if he had been a star of years' standing.

It went well; there was no question of that. Previous audiences had
always been rather cold towards this particular song, but this one got
on its feet and yelled for more. From all over the house came rapturous
demands that Henry should go back and do it again.

But Henry was giving no encores. He rose to his feet, a little stunned,
and automatically began to dust his clothes. The orchestra, unnerved by
this unrehearsed infusion of new business, had stopped playing.
Bulgarian officers and Japanese girls alike seemed unequal to the
situation. They stood about, waiting for the next thing to break loose.
From somewhere far away came faintly the voice of the stage-manager
inventing new words, new combinations of words, and new throat noises.

And then Henry, massaging a stricken elbow, was aware of Miss Weaver at
his side. Looking up, he caught Miss Weaver's eye.

A familiar stage-direction of melodrama reads, 'Exit cautious through
gap in hedge'. It was Henry's first appearance on any stage, but he did
it like a veteran.

'My dear fellow,' said Walter Jelliffe. The hour was midnight, and he
was sitting in Henry's bedroom at the hotel. Leaving the theatre, Henry
had gone to bed almost instinctively. Bed seemed the only haven for
him. 'My dear fellow, don't apologize. You have put me under lasting
obligations. In the first place, with your unerring sense of the stage,
you saw just the spot where the piece needed livening up, and you
livened it up. That was good; but far better was it that you also sent
our Miss Weaver into violent hysterics, from which she emerged to hand
in her notice. She leaves us tomorrow.'

Henry was appalled at the extent of the disaster for which he was
responsible.

'What will you do?'

'Do! Why, it's what we have all been praying for--a miracle which
should eject Miss Weaver. It needed a genius like you to come to bring
it off. Sidney Crane's wife can play the part without rehearsal. She
understudied it all last season in London. Crane has just been speaking
to her on the phone, and she is catching the night express.'

Henry sat up in bed.

'What!'

'What's the trouble now?'

'Sidney Crane's wife?'

'What about her?'

A bleakness fell upon Henry's soul.

'She was the woman who was employing me. Now I shall be taken off the
job and have to go back to London.'

'You don't mean that it was really Crane's wife?'

Jelliffe was regarding him with a kind of awe.

'Laddie,' he said, in a hushed voice, 'you almost scare me. There seems
to be no limit to your powers as a mascot. You fill the house every
night, you get rid of the Weaver woman, and now you tell me this. I
drew Crane in the sweep, and I would have taken twopence for my chance
of winning it.'

'I shall get a telegram from my boss tomorrow recalling me.'

'Don't go. Stick with me. Join the troupe.'

Henry stared.

'What do you mean? I can't sing or act.'

Jelliffe's voice thrilled with earnestness.

'My boy, I can go down the Strand and pick up a hundred fellows who can
sing and act. I don't want them. I turn them away. But a seventh son of
a seventh son like you, a human horseshoe like you, a king of mascots
like you--they don't make them nowadays. They've lost the pattern. If
you like to come with me I'll give you a contract for any number of
years you suggest. I need you in my business.' He rose. 'Think it over,
laddie, and let me know tomorrow. Look here upon this picture, and on
that. As a sleuth you are poor. You couldn't detect a bass-drum in a
telephone-booth. You have no future. You are merely among those
present. But as a mascot--my boy, you're the only thing in sight. You
can't help succeeding on the stage. You don't have to know how to act.
Look at the dozens of good actors who are out of jobs. Why? Unlucky. No
other reason. With your luck and a little experience you'll be a star
before you know you've begun. Think it over, and let me know in the
morning.'

Before Henry's eyes there rose a sudden vision of Alice: Alice no
longer unattainable; Alice walking on his arm down the aisle; Alice
mending his socks; Alice with her heavenly hands fingering his salary
envelope.

'Don't go,' he said. 'Don't go. I'll let you know now.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The scene is the Strand, hard by Bedford Street; the time, that restful
hour of the afternoon when they of the gnarled faces and the bright
clothing gather together in groups to tell each other how good they
are.

Hark! A voice.

'Rather! Courtneidge and the Guv'nor keep on trying to get me, but I
turn them down every time. "No," I said to Malone only yesterday, "not
for me! I'm going with old Wally Jelliffe, the same as usual, and there
isn't the money in the Mint that'll get me away." Malone got all worked
up. He--'

It is the voice of Pifield Rice, actor.




EXTRICATING YOUNG GUSSIE


She sprang it on me before breakfast. There in seven words you have a
complete character sketch of my Aunt Agatha. I could go on indefinitely
about brutality and lack of consideration. I merely say that she routed
me out of bed to listen to her painful story somewhere in the small
hours. It can't have been half past eleven when Jeeves, my man, woke me
out of the dreamless and broke the news:

'Mrs Gregson to see you, sir.'

I thought she must be walking in her sleep, but I crawled out of bed
and got into a dressing-gown. I knew Aunt Agatha well enough to know
that, if she had come to see me, she was going to see me. That's the
sort of woman she is.

She was sitting bolt upright in a chair, staring into space. When I
came in she looked at me in that darn critical way that always makes me
feel as if I had gelatine where my spine ought to be. Aunt Agatha is
one of those strong-minded women. I should think Queen Elizabeth must
have been something like her. She bosses her husband, Spencer Gregson,
a battered little chappie on the Stock Exchange. She bosses my cousin,
Gussie Mannering-Phipps. She bosses her sister-in-law, Gussie's mother.
And, worst of all, she bosses me. She has an eye like a man-eating
fish, and she has got moral suasion down to a fine point.

I dare say there are fellows in the world--men of blood and iron, don't
you know, and all that sort of thing--whom she couldn't intimidate; but
if you're a chappie like me, fond of a quiet life, you simply curl into
a ball when you see her coming, and hope for the best. My experience is
that when Aunt Agatha wants you to do a thing you do it, or else you
find yourself wondering why those fellows in the olden days made such a
fuss when they had trouble with the Spanish Inquisition.

'Halloa, Aunt Agatha!' I said

'Bertie,' she said, 'you look a sight. You look perfectly dissipated.'

I was feeling like a badly wrapped brown-paper parcel. I'm never at my
best in the early morning. I said so.

'Early morning! I had breakfast three hours ago, and have been walking
in the park ever since, trying to compose my thoughts.'

If I ever breakfasted at half past eight I should walk on the
Embankment, trying to end it all in a watery grave.

'I am extremely worried, Bertie. That is why I have come to you.'

And then I saw she was going to start something, and I bleated weakly
to Jeeves to bring me tea. But she had begun before I could get it.

'What are your immediate plans, Bertie?'

'Well, I rather thought of tottering out for a bite of lunch later on,
and then possibly staggering round to the club, and after that, if I
felt strong enough, I might trickle off to Walton Heath for a round of
golf.'

I am not interested in your totterings and tricklings. I mean, have you
any important engagements in the next week or so?'

I scented danger.

'Rather,' I said. 'Heaps! Millions! Booked solid!'

'What are they?'

'I--er--well, I don't quite know.'

'I thought as much. You have no engagements. Very well, then, I want
you to start immediately for America.'

'America!'

Do not lose sight of the fact that all this was taking place on an
empty stomach, shortly after the rising of the lark.

'Yes, America. I suppose even you have heard of America?'

'But why America?'

'Because that is where your Cousin Gussie is. He is in New York, and I
can't get at him.'

'What's Gussie been doing?'

'Gussie is making a perfect idiot of himself.'

To one who knew young Gussie as well as I did, the words opened up a
wide field for speculation.

'In what way?'

'He has lost his head over a creature.'

On past performances this rang true. Ever since he arrived at man's
estate Gussie had been losing his head over creatures. He's that sort
of chap. But, as the creatures never seemed to lose their heads over
him, it had never amounted to much.

'I imagine you know perfectly well why Gussie went to America, Bertie.
You know how wickedly extravagant your Uncle Cuthbert was.'

She alluded to Gussie's governor, the late head of the family, and I am
bound to say she spoke the truth. Nobody was fonder of old Uncle
Cuthbert than I was, but everybody knows that, where money was
concerned, he was the most complete chump in the annals of the nation.
He had an expensive thirst. He never backed a horse that didn't get
housemaid's knee in the middle of the race. He had a system of beating
the bank at Monte Carlo which used to make the administration hang out
the bunting and ring the joy-bells when he was sighted in the offing.
Take him for all in all, dear old Uncle Cuthbert was as willing a
spender as ever called the family lawyer a bloodsucking vampire because
he wouldn't let Uncle Cuthbert cut down the timber to raise another
thousand.

'He left your Aunt Julia very little money for a woman in her
position. Beechwood requires a great deal of keeping up, and
poor dear Spencer, though he does his best to help, has not
unlimited resources. It was clearly understood why Gussie went
to America. He is not clever, but he is very good-looking, and,
though he has no title, the Mannering-Phippses are one of the best
and oldest families in England. He had some excellent letters of
introduction, and when he wrote home to say that he had met the
most charming and beautiful girl in the world I felt quite happy.
He continued to rave about her for several mails, and then this
morning a letter has come from him in which he says, quite casually
as a sort of afterthought, that he knows we are broadminded enough
not to think any the worse of her because she is on the vaudeville
stage.'

'Oh, I say!'

'It was like a thunderbolt. The girl's name, it seems, is Ray Denison,
and according to Gussie she does something which he describes as a
single on the big time. What this degraded performance may be I have
not the least notion. As a further recommendation he states that she
lifted them out of their seats at Mosenstein's last week. Who she may
be, and how or why, and who or what Mr Mosenstein may be, I cannot tell
you.'

'By jove,' I said, 'it's like a sort of thingummybob, isn't it? A sort
of fate, what?'

'I fail to understand you.'

'Well, Aunt Julia, you know, don't you know? Heredity, and so forth.
What's bred in the bone will come out in the wash, and all that kind of
thing, you know.'

'Don't be absurd, Bertie.'

That was all very well, but it was a coincidence for all that. Nobody
ever mentions it, and the family have been trying to forget it for
twenty-five years, but it's a known fact that my Aunt Julia, Gussie's
mother, was a vaudeville artist once, and a very good one, too, I'm
told. She was playing in pantomime at Drury Lane when Uncle Cuthbert
saw her first. It was before my time, of course, and long before I was
old enough to take notice the family had made the best of it, and Aunt
Agatha had pulled up her socks and put in a lot of educative work, and
with a microscope you couldn't tell Aunt Julia from a genuine
dyed-in-the-wool aristocrat. Women adapt themselves so quickly!

I have a pal who married Daisy Trimble of the Gaiety, and when I meet
her now I feel like walking out of her presence backwards. But there
the thing was, and you couldn't get away from it. Gussie had vaudeville
blood in him, and it looked as if he were reverting to type, or
whatever they call it.

'By Jove,' I said, for I am interested in this heredity stuff, 'perhaps
the thing is going to be a regular family tradition, like you read
about in books--a sort of Curse of the Mannering-Phippses, as it were.
Perhaps each head of the family's going to marry into vaudeville for
ever and ever. Unto the what-d'you-call-it generation, don't you know?'

'Please do not be quite idiotic, Bertie. There is one head of the
family who is certainly not going to do it, and that is Gussie. And you
are going to America to stop him.'

'Yes, but why me?'

'Why you? You are too vexing, Bertie. Have you no sort of feeling for
the family? You are too lazy to try to be a credit to yourself, but at
least you can exert yourself to prevent Gussie's disgracing us. You are
going to America because you are Gussie's cousin, because you have
always been his closest friend, because you are the only one of the
family who has absolutely nothing to occupy his time except golf and
night clubs.'

'I play a lot of auction.'

'And as you say, idiotic gambling in low dens. If you require another
reason, you are going because I ask you as a personal favour.'

What she meant was that, if I refused, she would exert the full bent of
her natural genius to make life a Hades for me. She held me with her
glittering eye. I have never met anyone who can give a better imitation
of the Ancient Mariner.

'So you will start at once, won't you, Bertie?'

I didn't hesitate.

'Rather!' I said. 'Of course I will'

Jeeves came in with the tea.

'Jeeves,' I said, 'we start for America on Saturday.'

'Very good, sir,' he said; 'which suit will you wear?'

New York is a large city conveniently situated on the edge of America,
so that you step off the liner right on to it without an effort. You
can't lose your way. You go out of a barn and down some stairs, and
there you are, right in among it. The only possible objection any
reasonable chappie could find to the place is that they loose you into
it from the boat at such an ungodly hour.

I left Jeeves to get my baggage safely past an aggregation of
suspicious-minded pirates who were digging for buried treasures among
my new shirts, and drove to Gussie's hotel, where I requested the squad
of gentlemanly clerks behind the desk to produce him.

That's where I got my first shock. He wasn't there. I pleaded with them
to think again, and they thought again, but it was no good. No Augustus
Mannering-Phipps on the premises.

I admit I was hard hit. There I was alone in a strange city and no
signs of Gussie. What was the next step? I am never one of the master
minds in the early morning; the old bean doesn't somehow seem to get
into its stride till pretty late in the p.m.'s, and I couldn't think
what to do. However, some instinct took me through a door at the back
of the lobby, and I found myself in a large room with an enormous
picture stretching across the whole of one wall, and under the picture
a counter, and behind the counter divers chappies in white, serving
drinks. They have barmen, don't you know, in New York, not barmaids.
Rum idea!

I put myself unreservedly into the hands of one of the white chappies.
He was a friendly soul, and I told him the whole state of affairs. I
asked him what he thought would meet the case.

He said that in a situation of that sort he usually prescribed a
'lightning whizzer', an invention of his own. He said this was what
rabbits trained on when they were matched against grizzly bears, and
there was only one instance on record of the bear having lasted three
rounds. So I tried a couple, and, by Jove! the man was perfectly right.
As I drained the second a great load seemed to fall from my heart, and
I went out in quite a braced way to have a look at the city.

I was surprised to find the streets quite full. People were bustling
along as if it were some reasonable hour and not the grey dawn. In the
tramcars they were absolutely standing on each other's necks. Going to
business or something, I take it. Wonderful johnnies!

The odd part of it was that after the first shock of seeing all this
frightful energy the thing didn't seem so strange. I've spoken to
fellows since who have been to New York, and they tell me they found it
just the same. Apparently there's something in the air, either the
ozone or the phosphates or something, which makes you sit up and take
notice. A kind of zip, as it were. A sort of bally freedom, if you know
what I mean, that gets into your blood and bucks you up, and makes you
feel that--

    _God's in His Heaven:
    All's right with the world_,

and you don't care if you've got odd socks on. I can't express it
better than by saying that the thought uppermost in my mind, as I
walked about the place they call Times Square, was that there were
three thousand miles of deep water between me and my Aunt Agatha.

It's a funny thing about looking for things. If you hunt for a needle
in a haystack you don't find it. If you don't give a darn whether you
ever see the needle or not it runs into you the first time you lean
against the stack. By the time I had strolled up and down once or
twice, seeing the sights and letting the white chappie's corrective
permeate my system, I was feeling that I wouldn't care if Gussie and I
never met again, and I'm dashed if I didn't suddenly catch sight of the
old lad, as large as life, just turning in at a doorway down the
street.

I called after him, but he didn't hear me, so I legged it in pursuit
and caught him going into an office on the first floor. The name on the
door was Abe Riesbitter, Vaudeville Agent, and from the other side of
the door came the sound of many voices.

He turned and stared at me.

'Bertie! What on earth are you doing? Where have you sprung from? When
did you arrive?'

'Landed this morning. I went round to your hotel, but they said you
weren't there. They had never heard of you.'

'I've changed my name. I call myself George Wilson.'

'Why on earth?'

'Well, you try calling yourself Augustus Mannering-Phipps over here,
and see how it strikes you. You feel a perfect ass. I don't know what
it is about America, but the broad fact is that it's not a place where
you can call yourself Augustus Mannering-Phipps. And there's another
reason. I'll tell you later. Bertie, I've fallen in love with the
dearest girl in the world.'

The poor old nut looked at me in such a deuced cat-like way, standing
with his mouth open, waiting to be congratulated, that I simply hadn't
the heart to tell him that I knew all about that already, and had come
over to the country for the express purpose of laying him a stymie.

So I congratulated him.

'Thanks awfully, old man,' he said. 'It's a bit premature, but I fancy
it's going to be all right. Come along in here, and I'll tell you about
it.'

'What do you want in this place? It looks a rummy spot.'

'Oh, that's part of the story. I'll tell you the whole thing.'

We opened the door marked 'Waiting Room'. I never saw such a crowded
place in my life. The room was packed till the walls bulged.

Gussie explained.

'Pros,' he said, 'music-hall artistes, you know, waiting to see old Abe
Riesbitter. This is September the first, vaudeville's opening day. The
early fall,' said Gussie, who is a bit of a poet in his way, 'is
vaudeville's springtime. All over the country, as August wanes,
sparkling comediennes burst into bloom, the sap stirs in the veins of
tramp cyclists, and last year's contortionists, waking from their
summer sleep, tie themselves tentatively into knots. What I mean is,
this is the beginning of the new season, and everybody's out hunting
for bookings.'

'But what do you want here?'

'Oh, I've just got to see Abe about something. If you see a fat man
with about fifty-seven chins come out of that door there grab him, for
that'll be Abe. He's one of those fellows who advertise each step up
they take in the world by growing another chin. I'm told that way back
in the nineties he only had two. If you do grab Abe, remember that he
knows me as George Wilson.'

'You said that you were going to explain that George Wilson business to
me, Gussie, old man.'

'Well, it's this way--'

At this juncture dear old Gussie broke off short, rose from his seat,
and sprang with indescribable vim at an extraordinarily stout chappie
who had suddenly appeared. There was the deuce of a rush for him, but
Gussie had got away to a good start, and the rest of the singers,
dancers, jugglers, acrobats, and refined sketch teams seemed to
recognize that he had won the trick, for they ebbed back into their
places again, and Gussie and I went into the inner room.

Mr Riesbitter lit a cigar, and looked at us solemnly over his zareba of
chins.

'Now, let me tell ya something,' he said to Gussie. 'You lizzun t' me.'

Gussie registered respectful attention. Mr Riesbitter mused for a
moment and shelled the cuspidor with indirect fire over the edge of the
desk.

'Lizzun t' me,' he said again. 'I seen you rehearse, as I promised Miss
Denison I would. You ain't bad for an amateur. You gotta lot to learn,
but it's in you. What it comes to is that I can fix you up in the
four-a-day, if you'll take thirty-five per. I can't do better than
that, and I wouldn't have done that if the little lady hadn't of kep'
after me. Take it or leave it. What do you say?'

'I'll take it,' said Gussie, huskily. 'Thank you.'

In the passage outside, Gussie gurgled with joy and slapped me on the
back. 'Bertie, old man, it's all right. I'm the happiest man in New
York.'

'Now what?'

'Well, you see, as I was telling you when Abe came in, Ray's father
used to be in the profession. He was before our time, but I remember
hearing about him--Joe Danby. He used to be well known in London before
he came over to America. Well, he's a fine old boy, but as obstinate as
a mule, and he didn't like the idea of Ray marrying me because I wasn't
in the profession. Wouldn't hear of it. Well, you remember at Oxford I
could always sing a song pretty well; so Ray got hold of old Riesbitter
and made him promise to come and hear me rehearse and get me bookings
if he liked my work. She stands high with him. She coached me for
weeks, the darling. And now, as you heard him say, he's booked me in
the small time at thirty-five dollars a week.'

I steadied myself against the wall. The effects of the restoratives
supplied by my pal at the hotel bar were beginning to work off, and I
felt a little weak. Through a sort of mist I seemed to have a vision of
Aunt Agatha hearing that the head of the Mannering-Phippses was about
to appear on the vaudeville stage. Aunt Agatha's worship of the family
name amounts to an obsession. The Mannering-Phippses were an
old-established clan when William the Conqueror was a small boy going
round with bare legs and a catapult. For centuries they have called
kings by their first names and helped dukes with their weekly rent; and
there's practically nothing a Mannering-Phipps can do that doesn't blot
his escutcheon. So what Aunt Agatha would say--beyond saying that it
was all my fault--when she learned the horrid news, it was beyond me to
imagine.

'Come back to the hotel, Gussie,' I said. 'There's a sportsman there
who mixes things he calls "lightning whizzers". Something tells me I
need one now. And excuse me for one minute, Gussie. I want to send a
cable.'

It was clear to me by now that Aunt Agatha had picked the wrong man for
this job of disentangling Gussie from the clutches of the American
vaudeville profession. What I needed was reinforcements. For a moment I
thought of cabling Aunt Agatha to come over, but reason told me that
this would be overdoing it. I wanted assistance, but not so badly as
that. I hit what seemed to me the happy mean. I cabled to Gussie's
mother and made it urgent.

'What were you cabling about?' asked Gussie, later.

'Oh just to say I had arrived safely, and all that sort of tosh,' I
answered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gussie opened his vaudeville career on the following Monday at a rummy
sort of place uptown where they had moving pictures some of the time
and, in between, one or two vaudeville acts. It had taken a lot of
careful handling to bring him up to scratch. He seemed to take my
sympathy and assistance for granted, and I couldn't let him down. My
only hope, which grew as I listened to him rehearsing, was that he
would be such a frightful frost at his first appearance that he would
never dare to perform again; and, as that would automatically squash
the marriage, it seemed best to me to let the thing go on.

He wasn't taking any chances. On the Saturday and Sunday we practically
lived in a beastly little music-room at the offices of the publishers
whose songs he proposed to use. A little chappie with a hooked nose
sucked a cigarette and played the piano all day. Nothing could tire
that lad. He seemed to take a personal interest in the thing.

Gussie would cleat his throat and begin:

'There's a great big choo-choo waiting at the deepo.'

THE CHAPPIE (playing chords): 'Is that so? What's it waiting for?'

GUSSIE (rather rattled at the interruption): 'Waiting for me.'

THE CHAPPIE (surprised): For you?'

GUSSIE (sticking to it): 'Waiting for me-e-ee!'

THE CHAPPIE (sceptically): 'You don't say!'

GUSSIE: 'For I'm off to Tennessee.'

THE CHAPPIE (conceding a point): 'Now, I live at Yonkers.'

He did this all through the song. At first poor old Gussie asked him to
stop, but the chappie said, No, it was always done. It helped to get
pep into the thing. He appealed to me whether the thing didn't want a
bit of pep, and I said it wanted all the pep it could get. And the
chappie said to Gussie, 'There you are!' So Gussie had to stand it.

The other song that he intended to sing was one of those moon songs. He
told me in a hushed voice that he was using it because it was one of
the songs that the girl Ray sang when lifting them out of their seats
at Mosenstein's and elsewhere. The fact seemed to give it sacred
associations for him.

You will scarcely believe me, but the management expected Gussie to
show up and start performing at one o'clock in the afternoon. I told
him they couldn't be serious, as they must know that he would be
rolling out for a bit of lunch at that hour, but Gussie said this was
the usual thing in the four-a-day, and he didn't suppose he would ever
get any lunch again until he landed on the big time. I was just
condoling with him, when I found that he was taking it for granted that
I should be there at one o'clock, too. My idea had been that I should
look in at night, when--if he survived--he would be coming up for the
fourth time; but I've never deserted a pal in distress, so I said
good-bye to the little lunch I'd been planning at a rather decent
tavern I'd discovered on Fifth Avenue, and trailed along. They were
showing pictures when I reached my seat. It was one of those Western
films, where the cowboy jumps on his horse and rides across country at
a hundred and fifty miles an hour to escape the sheriff, not knowing,
poor chump! that he might just as well stay where he is, the sheriff
having a horse of his own which can do three hundred miles an hour
without coughing. I was just going to close my eyes and try to forget
till they put Gussie's name up when I discovered that I was sitting
next to a deucedly pretty girl.

No, let me be honest. When I went in I had seen that there was a
deucedly pretty girl sitting in that particular seat, so I had taken
the next one. What happened now was that I began, as it were, to drink
her in. I wished they would turn the lights up so that I could see her
better. She was rather small, with great big eyes and a ripping smile.
It was a shame to let all that run to seed, so to speak, in
semi-darkness.

Suddenly the lights did go up, and the orchestra began to play a tune
which, though I haven't much of an ear for music, seemed somehow
familiar. The next instant out pranced old Gussie from the wings in a
purple frock-coat and a brown top-hat, grinned feebly at the audience,
tripped over his feet, blushed, and began to sing the Tennessee song.

It was rotten. The poor nut had got stage fright so badly that it
practically eliminated his voice. He sounded like some far-off echo of
the past 'yodelling' through a woollen blanket.

For the first time since I had heard that he was about to go into
vaudeville I felt a faint hope creeping over me. I was sorry for the
wretched chap, of course, but there was no denying that the thing had
its bright side. No management on earth would go on paying thirty-five
dollars a week for this sort of performance. This was going to be
Gussie's first and only. He would have to leave the profession. The old
boy would say, 'Unhand my daughter'. And, with decent luck, I saw
myself leading Gussie on to the next England-bound liner and handing
him over intact to Aunt Agatha.

He got through the song somehow and limped off amidst roars of silence
from the audience. There was a brief respite, then out he came again.

He sang this time as if nobody loved him. As a song, it was not a very
pathetic song, being all about coons spooning in June under the moon,
and so on and so forth, but Gussie handled it in such a sad, crushed
way that there was genuine anguish in every line. By the time he
reached the refrain I was nearly in tears. It seemed such a rotten sort
of world with all that kind of thing going on in it.

He started the refrain, and then the most frightful thing happened. The
girl next to me got up in her seat, chucked her head back, and began to
sing too. I say 'too', but it wasn't really too, because her first note
stopped Gussie dead, as if he had been pole-axed.

I never felt so bally conspicuous in my life. I huddled down in my seat
and wished I could turn my collar up. Everybody seemed to be looking at
me.

In the midst of my agony I caught sight of Gussie. A complete change
had taken place in the old lad. He was looking most frightfully bucked.
I must say the girl was singing most awfully well, and it seemed to act
on Gussie like a tonic. When she came to the end of the refrain, he
took it up, and they sang it together, and the end of it was that he
went off the popular hero. The audience yelled for more, and were only
quieted when they turned down the lights and put on a film.

When I had recovered I tottered round to see Gussie. I found him
sitting on a box behind the stage, looking like one who had seen
visions.

'Isn't she a wonder, Bertie?' he said, devoutly. 'I hadn't a notion she
was going to be there. She's playing at the Auditorium this week, and
she can only just have had time to get back to her _matinee_. She
risked being late, just to come and see me through. She's my good
angel, Bertie. She saved me. If she hadn't helped me out I don't know
what would have happened. I was so nervous I didn't know what I was
doing. Now that I've got through the first show I shall be all right.'

I was glad I had sent that cable to his mother. I was going to need
her. The thing had got beyond me.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the next week I saw a lot of old Gussie, and was introduced to
the girl. I also met her father, a formidable old boy with quick
eyebrows and a sort of determined expression. On the following
Wednesday Aunt Julia arrived. Mrs Mannering-Phipps, my aunt Julia, is,
I think, the most dignified person I know. She lacks Aunt Agatha's
punch, but in a quiet way she has always contrived to make me feel,
from boyhood up, that I was a poor worm. Not that she harries me like
Aunt Agatha. The difference between the two is that Aunt Agatha conveys
the impression that she considers me personally responsible for all the
sin and sorrow in the world, while Aunt Julia's manner seems to suggest
that I am more to be pitied than censured.

If it wasn't that the thing was a matter of historical fact, I should
be inclined to believe that Aunt Julia had never been on the vaudeville
stage. She is like a stage duchess.

She always seems to me to be in a perpetual state of being about to
desire the butler to instruct the head footman to serve lunch in the
blue-room overlooking the west terrace. She exudes dignity. Yet,
twenty-five years ago, so I've been told by old boys who were lads
about town in those days, she was knocking them cold at the Tivoli in a
double act called 'Fun in a Tea-Shop', in which she wore tights and
sang a song with a chorus that began, 'Rumpty-tiddley-umpty-ay'.

There are some things a chappie's mind absolutely refuses to picture,
and Aunt Julia singing 'Rumpty-tiddley-umpty-ay' is one of them.

She got straight to the point within five minutes of our meeting.

'What is this about Gussie? Why did you cable for me, Bertie?'

'It's rather a long story,' I said, 'and complicated. If you don't
mind, I'll let you have it in a series of motion pictures. Suppose we
look in at the Auditorium for a few minutes.'

The girl, Ray, had been re-engaged for a second week at the Auditorium,
owing to the big success of her first week. Her act consisted of three
songs. She did herself well in the matter of costume and scenery. She
had a ripping voice. She looked most awfully pretty; and altogether the
act was, broadly speaking, a pippin.

Aunt Julia didn't speak till we were in our seats. Then she gave a sort
of sigh.

'It's twenty-five years since I was in a music-hall!'

She didn't say any more, but sat there with her eyes glued on the
stage.

After about half an hour the johnnies who work the card-index system at
the side of the stage put up the name of Ray Denison, and there was a
good deal of applause.

'Watch this act, Aunt Julia,' I said.

She didn't seem to hear me.

'Twenty-five years! What did you say, Bertie?'

'Watch this act and tell me what you think of it.'

'Who is it? Ray. Oh!'

'Exhibit A,' I said. 'The girl Gussie's engaged to.'

The girl did her act, and the house rose at her. They didn't want to
let her go. She had to come back again and again. When she had finally
disappeared I turned to Aunt Julia.

'Well?' I said.

'I like her work. She's an artist.'

'We will now, if you don't mind, step a goodish way uptown.'

And we took the subway to where Gussie, the human film, was earning his
thirty-five per. As luck would have it, we hadn't been in the place ten
minutes when out he came.

'Exhibit B,' I said. 'Gussie.'

I don't quite know what I had expected her to do, but I certainly
didn't expect her to sit there without a word. She did not move a
muscle, but just stared at Gussie as he drooled on about the moon. I
was sorry for the woman, for it must have been a shock to her to see
her only son in a mauve frockcoat and a brown top-hat, but I thought it
best to let her get a strangle-hold on the intricacies of the situation
as quickly as possible. If I had tried to explain the affair without
the aid of illustrations I should have talked all day and left her
muddled up as to who was going to marry whom, and why.

I was astonished at the improvement in dear old Gussie. He had got back
his voice and was putting the stuff over well. It reminded me of the
night at Oxford when, then but a lad of eighteen, he sang 'Let's All Go
Down the Strand' after a bump supper, standing the while up to his
knees in the college fountain. He was putting just the same zip into
the thing now.

When he had gone off Aunt Julia sat perfectly still for a long time,
and then she turned to me. Her eyes shone queerly.

'What does this mean, Bertie?'

She spoke quite quietly, but her voice shook a bit.

'Gussie went into the business,' I said, 'because the girl's father
wouldn't let him marry her unless he did. If you feel up to it perhaps
you wouldn't mind tottering round to One Hundred and Thirty-third
Street and having a chat with him. He's an old boy with eyebrows, and
he's Exhibit C on my list. When I've put you in touch with him I rather
fancy my share of the business is concluded, and it's up to you.'

The Danbys lived in one of those big apartments uptown which look as if
they cost the earth and really cost about half as much as a hall-room
down in the forties. We were shown into the sitting-room, and presently
old Danby came in.

'Good afternoon, Mr Danby,' I began.

I had got as far as that when there was a kind of gasping cry at my
elbow.

'Joe!' cried Aunt Julia, and staggered against the sofa.

For a moment old Danby stared at her, and then his mouth fell open and
his eyebrows shot up like rockets.

'Julie!'

And then they had got hold of each other's hands and were shaking them
till I wondered their arms didn't come unscrewed.

I'm not equal to this sort of thing at such short notice. The
change in Aunt Julia made me feel quite dizzy. She had shed her
_grande-dame_ manner completely, and was blushing and smiling. I
don't like to say such things of any aunt of mine, or I would go
further and put it on record that she was giggling. And old Danby, who
usually looked like a cross between a Roman emperor and Napoleon
Bonaparte in a bad temper, was behaving like a small boy.

'Joe!'

'Julie!'

'Dear old Joe! Fancy meeting you again!'

'Wherever have you come from, Julie?'

Well, I didn't know what it was all about, but I felt a bit out of it.
I butted in:

'Aunt Julia wants to have a talk with you, Mr Danby.'

'I knew you in a second, Joe!'

'It's twenty-five years since I saw you, kid, and you don't look a day
older.'

'Oh, Joe! I'm an old woman!'

'What are you doing over here? I suppose'--old Danby's cheerfulness
waned a trifle--'I suppose your husband is with you?'

'My husband died a long, long while ago, Joe.'

Old Danby shook his head.

'You never ought to have married out of the profession, Julie. I'm
not saying a word against the late--I can't remember his name; never
could--but you shouldn't have done it, an artist like you. Shall I ever
forget the way you used to knock them with "Rumpty-tiddley-umpty-ay"?'

'Ah! how wonderful you were in that act, Joe.' Aunt Julia sighed. 'Do
you remember the back-fall you used to do down the steps? I always have
said that you did the best back-fall in the profession.'

'I couldn't do it now!'

'Do you remember how we put it across at the Canterbury, Joe? Think of
it! The Canterbury's a moving-picture house now, and the old Mogul runs
French revues.'

'I'm glad I'm not there to see them.'

'Joe, tell me, why did you leave England?'

'Well, I--I wanted a change. No I'll tell you the truth, kid. I wanted
you, Julie. You went off and married that--whatever that stage-door
johnny's name was--and it broke me all up.'

Aunt Julia was staring at him. She is what they call a well-preserved
woman. It's easy to see that, twenty-five years ago, she must have been
something quite extraordinary to look at. Even now she's almost
beautiful. She has very large brown eyes, a mass of soft grey hair, and
the complexion of a girl of seventeen.

'Joe, you aren't going to tell me you were fond of me yourself!'

'Of course I was fond of you. Why did I let you have all the fat in
"Fun in a Tea-Shop"? Why did I hang about upstage while you sang
"Rumpty-tiddley-umpty-ay"? Do you remember my giving you a bag of buns
when we were on the road at Bristol?'

'Yes, but--'

'Do you remember my giving you the ham sandwiches at Portsmouth?'

'Joe!'

'Do you remember my giving you a seed-cake at Birmingham? What did you
think all that meant, if not that I loved you? Why, I was working up by
degrees to telling you straight out when you suddenly went off and
married that cane-sucking dude. That's why I wouldn't let my daughter
marry this young chap, Wilson, unless he went into the profession.
She's an artist--'

'She certainly is, Joe.'

'You've seen her? Where?'

'At the Auditorium just now. But, Joe, you mustn't stand in the way of
her marrying the man she's in love with. He's an artist, too.'

'In the small time.'

'You were in the small time once, Joe. You mustn't look down on him
because he's a beginner. I know you feel that your daughter is marrying
beneath her, but--'

'How on earth do you know anything about young Wilson?

'He's my son.'

'Your son?'

'Yes, Joe. And I've just been watching him work. Oh, Joe, you can't
think how proud I was of him! He's got it in him. It's fate. He's my
son and he's in the profession! Joe, you don't know what I've been
through for his sake. They made a lady of me. I never worked so hard in
my life as I did to become a real lady. They kept telling me I had got
to put it across, no matter what it cost, so that he wouldn't be
ashamed of me. The study was something terrible. I had to watch myself
every minute for years, and I never knew when I might fluff my lines or
fall down on some bit of business. But I did it, because I didn't want
him to be ashamed of me, though all the time I was just aching to be
back where I belonged.'

Old Danby made a jump at her, and took her by the shoulders.

'Come back where you belong, Julie!' he cried. 'Your husband's dead,
your son's a pro. Come back! It's twenty-five years ago, but I haven't
changed. I want you still. I've always wanted you. You've got to come
back, kid, where you belong.'

Aunt Julia gave a sort of gulp and looked at him.

'Joe!' she said in a kind of whisper.

'You're here, kid,' said Old Danby, huskily. 'You've come back....
Twenty-five years!... You've come back and you're going to stay!'

She pitched forward into his arms, and he caught her.

'Oh, Joe! Joe! Joe!' she said. 'Hold me. Don't let me go. Take care of
me.'

And I edged for the door and slipped from the room. I felt weak. The
old bean will stand a certain amount, but this was too much. I groped
my way out into the street and wailed for a taxi.

Gussie called on me at the hotel that night. He curveted into the room
as if he had bought it and the rest of the city.

'Bertie,' he said, 'I feel as if I were dreaming.'

'I wish I could feel like that, old top,' I said, and I took another
glance at a cable that had arrived half an hour ago from Aunt Agatha. I
had been looking at it at intervals ever since.

'Ray and I got back to her flat this evening. Who do you think was
there? The mater! She was sitting hand in hand with old Danby.'

'Yes?'

'He was sitting hand in hand with her.'

'Really?'

'They are going to be married.'

'Exactly.'

'Ray and I are going to be married.'

'I suppose so.'

'Bertie, old man, I feel immense. I look round me, and everything seems
to be absolutely corking. The change in the mater is marvellous. She is
twenty-five years younger. She and old Danby are talking of reviving
"Fun in a Tea-Shop", and going out on the road with it.'

I got up.

'Gussie, old top,' I said, 'leave me for a while. I would be alone. I
think I've got brain fever or something.'

'Sorry, old man; perhaps New York doesn't agree with you. When do you
expect to go back to England?'

I looked again at Aunt Agatha's cable.

'With luck,' I said, 'in about ten years.'

When he was gone I took up the cable and read it again.

'What is happening?' it read. 'Shall I come over?'

I sucked a pencil for a while, and then I wrote the reply.

It was not an easy cable to word, but I managed it.

'No,' I wrote, 'stay where you are. Profession overcrowded.'




WILTON'S HOLIDAY


When Jack Wilton first came to Marois Bay, none of us dreamed that he
was a man with a hidden sorrow in his life. There was something about
the man which made the idea absurd, or would have made it absurd if he
himself had not been the authority for the story. He looked so
thoroughly pleased with life and with himself. He was one of those men
whom you instinctively label in your mind as 'strong'. He was so
healthy, so fit, and had such a confident, yet sympathetic, look about
him that you felt directly you saw him that here was the one person you
would have selected as the recipient of that hard-luck story of yours.
You felt that his kindly strength would have been something to lean on.

As a matter of fact, it was by trying to lean on it that Spencer Clay
got hold of the facts of the case; and when young Clay got hold of
anything, Marois Bay at large had it hot and fresh a few hours later;
for Spencer was one of those slack-jawed youths who are
constitutionally incapable of preserving a secret.

Within two hours, then, of Clay's chat with Wilton, everyone in the
place knew that, jolly and hearty as the new-comer might seem, there
was that gnawing at his heart which made his outward cheeriness simply
heroic.

Clay, it seems, who is the worst specimen of self-pitier, had gone to
Wilton, in whom, as a new-comer, he naturally saw a fine fresh
repository for his tales of woe, and had opened with a long yarn of
some misfortune or other. I forget which it was; it might have been any
one of a dozen or so which he had constantly in stock, and it is
immaterial which it was. The point is that, having heard him out very
politely and patiently, Wilton came back at him with a story which
silenced even Clay. Spencer was equal to most things, but even he could
not go on whining about how he had foozled his putting and been snubbed
at the bridge-table, or whatever it was that he was pitying himself
about just then, when a man was telling him the story of a wrecked
life.

'He told me not to let it go any further,' said Clay to everyone he
met, 'but of course it doesn't matter telling you. It is a thing he
doesn't like to have known. He told me because he said there was
something about me that seemed to extract confidences--a kind of
strength, he said. You wouldn't think it to look at him, but his life
is an absolute blank. Absolutely ruined, don't you know. He told me the
whole thing so simply and frankly that it broke me all up. It seems
that he was engaged to be married a few years ago, and on the wedding
morning--absolutely on the wedding morning--the girl was taken suddenly
ill, and--'

'And died?'

'And died. Died in his arms. Absolutely in his arms, old top.'

'What a terrible thing!'

'Absolutely. He's never got over it. You won't let it go any further,
will you old man?'

And off sped Spencer, to tell the tale to someone else.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everyone was terribly sorry for Wilton. He was such a good fellow, such
a sportsman, and, above all, so young, that one hated the thought that,
laugh as he might, beneath his laughter there lay the pain of that
awful memory. He seemed so happy, too. It was only in moments of
confidence, in those heart-to-heart talks when men reveal their deeper
feelings, that he ever gave a hint that all was not well with him. As,
for example, when Ellerton, who is always in love with someone, backed
him into a corner one evening and began to tell him the story of his
latest affair, he had hardly begun when such a look of pain came over
Wilton's face that he ceased instantly. He said afterwards that the
sudden realization of the horrible break he was making hit him like a
bullet, and the manner in which he turned the conversation practically
without pausing from love to a discussion of the best method of getting
out of the bunker at the seventh hole was, in the circumstances, a
triumph of tact.

Marois Bay is a quiet place even in the summer, and the Wilton tragedy
was naturally the subject of much talk. It is a sobering thing to get a
glimpse of the underlying sadness of life like that, and there was a
disposition at first on the part of the community to behave in his
presence in a manner reminiscent of pall-bearers at a funeral. But
things soon adjusted themselves. He was outwardly so cheerful that it
seemed ridiculous for the rest of us to step softly and speak with
hushed voices. After all, when you came to examine it, the thing was
his affair, and it was for him to dictate the lines on which it should
be treated. If he elected to hide his pain under a bright smile and a
laugh like that of a hyena with a more than usually keen sense of
humour, our line was obviously to follow his lead.

We did so; and by degrees the fact that his life was permanently
blighted became almost a legend. At the back of our minds we were aware
of it, but it did not obtrude itself into the affairs of every day. It
was only when someone, forgetting, as Ellerton had done, tried to
enlist his sympathy for some misfortune of his own that the look of
pain in his eyes and the sudden tightening of his lips reminded us that
he still remembered.

Matters had been at this stage for perhaps two weeks when Mary Campbell
arrived.

Sex attraction is so purely a question of the taste of the individual
that the wise man never argues about it. He accepts its vagaries as
part of the human mystery, and leaves it at that. To me there was no
charm whatever about Mary Campbell. It may have been that, at the
moment, I was in love with Grace Bates, Heloise Miller, and Clarice
Wembley--for at Marois Bay, in the summer, a man who is worth his salt
is more than equal to three love affairs simultaneously--but anyway,
she left me cold. Not one thrill could she awake in me. She was small
and, to my mind, insignificant. Some men said that she had fine eyes.
They seemed to me just ordinary eyes. And her hair was just ordinary
hair. In fact, ordinary was the word that described her.

But from the first it was plain that she seemed wonderful with Wilton,
which was all the more remarkable, seeing that he was the one man of us
all who could have got any girl in Marois Bay that he wanted. When a
man is six foot high, is a combination of Hercules and Apollo, and
plays tennis, golf, and the banjo with almost superhuman vim, his path
with the girls of a summer seaside resort is pretty smooth. But, when
you add to all these things a tragedy like Wilton's, he can only be
described as having a walk-over.

Girls love a tragedy. At least, most girls do. It makes a man
interesting to them. Grace Bates was always going on about how
interesting Wilton was. So was Heloise Miller. So was Clarice Wembley.
But it was not until Mary Campbell came that he displayed any real
enthusiasm at all for the feminine element of Marois Bay. We put it
down to the fact that he could not forget, but the real reason, I now
know, was that he considered that girls were a nuisance on the links
and in the tennis-court. I suppose a plus two golfer and a Wildingesque
tennis-player, such as Wilton was, does feel like that. Personally, I
think that girls add to the fun of the thing. But then, my handicap is
twelve, and, though I have been playing tennis for many years, I doubt
if I have got my first serve--the fast one--over the net more than half
a dozen times.

But Mary Campbell overcame Wilton's prejudices in twenty-four hours. He
seemed to feel lonely on the links without her, and he positively egged
her to be his partner in the doubles. What Mary thought of him we did
not know. She was one of those inscrutable girls.

And so things went on. If it had not been that I knew Wilton's story, I
should have classed the thing as one of those summer love-affairs to
which the Marois Bay air is so peculiarly conducive. The only reason
why anyone comes away from a summer at Marois Bay unbetrothed is
because there are so many girls that he falls in love with that his
holiday is up before he can, so to speak, concentrate.

But in Wilton's case this was out of the question. A man does not get
over the sort of blow he had had, not, at any rate, for many years: and
we had gathered that his tragedy was comparatively recent.

I doubt if I was ever more astonished in my life than the night when he
confided in me. Why he should have chosen me as a confidant I cannot
say. I am inclined to think that I happened to be alone with him at the
psychological moment when a man must confide in somebody or burst; and
Wilton chose the lesser evil.

I was strolling along the shore after dinner, smoking a cigar and
thinking of Grace Bates, Heloise Miller, and Clarice Wembley, when I
happened upon him. It was a beautiful night, and we sat down and drank
it in for a while. The first intimation I had that all was not well
with him was when he suddenly emitted a hollow groan.

The next moment he had begun to confide.

'I'm in the deuce of a hole,' he said. 'What would you do in my
position?'

'Yes?' I said.

'I proposed to Mary Campbell this evening.'

'Congratulations.'

'Thanks. She refused me.'

'Refused you!'

'Yes--because of Amy.'

It seemed to me that the narrative required footnotes.

'Who is Amy?' I said.

'Amy is the girl--'

'Which girl?'

'The girl who died, you know. Mary had got hold of the whole story. In
fact, it was the tremendous sympathy she showed that encouraged me to
propose. If it hadn't been for that, I shouldn't have had the nerve.
I'm not fit to black her shoes.'

Odd, the poor opinion a man always has--when he is in love--of his
personal attractions. There were times when I thought of Grace Bates,
Heloise Miller, and Clarice Wembley, when I felt like one of the beasts
that perish. But then, I'm nothing to write home about, whereas the
smallest gleam of intelligence should have told Wilton that he was a
kind of Ouida guardsman.

'This evening I managed somehow to do it. She was tremendously nice
about it--said she was very fond of me and all that--but it was quite
out of the question because of Amy.'

'I don't follow this. What did she mean?'

'It's perfectly clear, if you bear in mind that Mary is the most
sensitive, spiritual, highly strung girl that ever drew breath,' said
Wilton, a little coldly. 'Her position is this: she feels that, because
of Amy, she can never have my love completely; between us there would
always be Amy's memory. It would be the same as if she married a
widower.'

'Well, widowers marry.'

'They don't marry girls like Mary.'

I couldn't help feeling that this was a bit of luck for the widowers;
but I didn't say so. One has always got to remember that opinions
differ about girls. One man's peach, so to speak, is another man's
poison. I have met men who didn't like Grace Bates, men who, if Heloise
Miller or Clarice Wembley had given them their photographs, would have
used them to cut the pages of a novel.

'Amy stands between us,' said Wilton.

I breathed a sympathetic snort. I couldn't think of anything noticeably
suitable to say.

'Stands between us,' repeated Wilton. 'And the damn silly part of the
whole thing is that there isn't any Amy. I invented her.'

'You--what!'

'Invented her. Made her up. No, I'm not mad. I had a reason. Let me
see, you come from London, don't you?'

'Yes.'

'Then you haven't any friends. It's different with me. I live in a
small country town, and everyone's my friend. I don't know what it is
about me, but for some reason, ever since I can remember, I've been
looked on as the strong man of my town, the man who's _all right_.
Am I making myself clear?'

'Not quite.'

'Well, what I am trying to get at is this. Either because I'm a strong
sort of fellow to look at, and have obviously never been sick in my
life, or because I can't help looking pretty cheerful, the whole of
Bridley-in-the-Wold seems to take it for granted that I can't possibly
have any troubles of my own, and that I am consequently fair game for
anyone who has any sort of worry. I have the sympathetic manner, and
they come to me to be cheered up. If a fellow's in love, he makes a
bee-line for me, and tells me all about it. If anyone has had a
bereavement, I am the rock on which he leans for support. Well, I'm a
patient sort of man, and, as far as Bridley-in-the-Wold is concerned, I
am willing to play the part. But a strong man does need an occasional
holiday, and I made up my mind that I would get it. Directly I got here
I saw that the same old game was going to start. Spencer Clay swooped
down on me at once. I'm as big a draw with the Spencer Clay type of
maudlin idiot as catnip is with a cat. Well, I could stand it at home,
but I was hanged if I was going to have my holiday spoiled. So I
invented Amy. Now do you see?'

'Certainly I see. And I perceive something else which you appear to
have overlooked. If Amy doesn't exist--or, rather, never did exist--she
cannot stand between you and Miss Campbell. Tell her what you have told
me, and all will be well.'

He shook his head.

'You don't know Mary. She would never forgive me. You don't know what
sympathy, what angelic sympathy, she has poured out on me about Amy. I
can't possibly tell her the whole thing was a fraud. It would make her
feel so foolish.'

'You must risk it. At the worst, you lose nothing.'

He brightened a little.

'No, that's true,' he said. 'I've half a mind to do it.'

'Make it a whole mind,' I said, 'and you win out.'

I was wrong. Sometimes I am. The trouble was, apparently, that I didn't
know Mary. I am sure Grace Bates, Heloise Miller, or Clarice Wembley
would not have acted as she did. They might have been a trifle stunned
at first, but they would soon have come round, and all would have been
joy. But with Mary, no. What took place at the interview I do not know;
but it was swiftly perceived by Marois Bay that the Wilton-Campbell
alliance was off. They no longer walked together, golfed together, and
played tennis on the same side of the net. They did not even speak to
each other.

      *      *      *      *      *

The rest of the story I can speak of only from hearsay. How it became
public property, I do not know. But there was a confiding strain in
Wilton, and I imagine he confided in someone, who confided in someone
else. At any rate, it is recorded in Marois Bay's unwritten archives,
from which I now extract it.

      *      *      *      *      *

For some days after the breaking-off of diplomatic relations, Wilton
seemed too pulverized to resume the offensive. He mooned about the
links by himself, playing a shocking game, and generally comported
himself like a man who has looked for the escape of gas with a lighted
candle. In affairs of love the strongest men generally behave with the
most spineless lack of resolution. Wilton weighed thirteen stone, and
his muscles were like steel cables; but he could not have shown less
pluck in this crisis in his life if he had been a poached egg. It was
pitiful to see him.

Mary, in these days, simply couldn't see that he was on the earth. She
looked round him, above him, and through him, but never at him; which
was rotten from Wilton's point of view, for he had developed a sort of
wistful expression--I am convinced that he practised it before the
mirror after his bath--which should have worked wonders, if only he
could have got action with it. But she avoided his eye as if he had
been a creditor whom she was trying to slide past on the street.

She irritated me. To let the breach widen in this way was absurd.
Wilton, when I said as much to him, said that it was due to her
wonderful sensitiveness and highly strungness, and that it was just one
more proof to him of the loftiness of her soul and her shrinking horror
of any form of deceit. In fact, he gave me the impression that, though
the affair was rending his vitals, he took a mournful pleasure in
contemplating her perfection.

Now one afternoon Wilton took his misery for a long walk along the
seashore. He tramped over the sand for some considerable time, and
finally pulled up in a little cove, backed by high cliffs and dotted
with rocks. The shore around Marois Bay is full of them.

By this time the afternoon sun had begun to be too warm for comfort,
and it struck Wilton that he could be a great deal more comfortable
nursing his wounded heart with his back against one of the rocks than
tramping any farther over the sand. Most of the Marois Bay scenery is
simply made as a setting for the nursing of a wounded heart. The cliffs
are a sombre indigo, sinister and forbidding; and even on the finest
days the sea has a curious sullen look. You have only to get away from
the crowd near the bathing-machines and reach one of these small coves
and get your book against a rock and your pipe well alight, and you can
simply wallow in misery. I have done it myself. The day when Heloise
Miller went golfing with Teddy Bingley I spent the whole afternoon in
one of these retreats. It is true that, after twenty minutes of
contemplating the breakers, I fell asleep; but that is bound to happen.

It happened to Wilton. For perhaps half an hour he brooded, and then
his pipe fell from his mouth and he dropped off into a peaceful
slumber. And time went by.

It was a touch of cramp that finally woke him. He jumped up with a
yell, and stood there massaging his calf. And he had hardly got rid of
the pain, when a startled exclamation broke the primeval stillness; and
there, on the other side of the rock, was Mary Campbell.

Now, if Wilton had had any inductive reasoning in his composition at
all, he would have been tremendously elated. A girl does not creep out
to a distant cove at Marois Bay unless she is unhappy; and if Mary
Campbell was unhappy she must be unhappy about him; and if she was
unhappy about him all he had to do was to show a bit of determination
and get the whole thing straightened out. But Wilton, whom grief had
reduced to the mental level of an oyster, did not reason this out; and
the sight of her deprived him of practically all his faculties,
including speech. He just stood there and yammered.

'Did you follow me here, Mr Wilton?' said Mary, very coldly.

He shook his head. Eventually he managed to say that he had come there
by chance, and had fallen asleep under the rock. As this was exactly
what Mary had done, she could not reasonably complain. So that
concluded the conversation for the time being. She walked away in the
direction of Marois Bay without another word, and presently he lost
sight of her round a bend in the cliffs.

His position now was exceedingly unpleasant. If she had such a distaste
for his presence, common decency made it imperative that he should give
her a good start on the homeward journey. He could not tramp along a
couple of yards in the rear all the way. So he had to remain where he
was till she had got well off the mark. And as he was wearing a thin
flannel suit, and the sun had gone in, and a chilly breeze had sprung
up, his mental troubles were practically swamped in physical
discomfort.

Just as he had decided that he could now make a move, he was surprised
to see her coming back.

Wilton really was elated at this. The construction he put on it was
that she had relented and was coming back to fling her arms round his
neck. He was just bracing himself for the clash, when he caught her
eye, and it was as cold and unfriendly as the sea.

'I must go round the other way,' she said. 'The water has come up too
far on that side.'

And she walked past him to the other end of the cove.

The prospect of another wait chilled Wilton to the marrow. The wind had
now grown simply freezing, and it came through his thin suit and roamed
about all over him in a manner that caused him exquisite discomfort. He
began to jump to keep himself warm.

He was leaping heavenwards for the hundredth time, when, chancing to
glance to one side, he perceived Mary again returning. By this time his
physical misery had so completely overcome the softer emotions in his
bosom that his only feeling now was one of thorough irritation. It was
not fair, he felt, that she should jockey at the start in this way and
keep him hanging about here catching cold. He looked at her, when she
came within range, quite balefully.

'It is impossible,' she said, 'to get round that way either.'

One grows so accustomed in this world to everything going smoothly,
that the idea of actual danger had not yet come home to her. From where
she stood in the middle of the cove, the sea looked so distant that the
fact that it had closed the only ways of getting out was at the moment
merely annoying. She felt much the same as she would have felt if she
had arrived at a station to catch a train and had been told that the
train was not running.

She therefore seated herself on a rock, and contemplated the ocean.
Wilton walked up and down. Neither showed any disposition to exercise
that gift of speech which places Man in a class of his own, above the
ox, the ass, the common wart-hog, and the rest of the lower animals. It
was only when a wave swished over the base of her rock that Mary broke
the silence.

'The tide is coming _in_' she faltered.

She looked at the sea with such altered feelings that it seemed a
different sea altogether.

There was plenty of it to look at. It filled the entire mouth of the
little bay, swirling up the sand and lashing among the rocks in a
fashion which made one thought stand out above all the others in her
mind--the recollection that she could not swim.

'Mr Wilton!'

Wilton bowed coldly.

'Mr Wilton, the tide. It's coming IN.'

Wilton glanced superciliously at the sea.

'So,' he said, 'I perceive.'

'But what shall we do?'

Wilton shrugged his shoulders. He was feeling at war with Nature and
Humanity combined. The wind had shifted a few points to the east, and
was exploring his anatomy with the skill of a qualified surgeon.

'We shall drown,' cried Miss Campbell. 'We shall drown. We shall drown.
We shall drown.'

All Wilton's resentment left him. Until he heard that pitiful wail his
only thoughts had been for himself.

'Mary!' he said, with a wealth of tenderness in his voice.

She came to him as a little child comes to its mother, and he put his
arm around her.

'Oh, Jack!'

'My darling!'

'I'm frightened!'

'My precious!'

It is in moments of peril, when the chill breath of fear blows upon our
souls, clearing them of pettiness, that we find ourselves.

She looked about her wildly.

'Could we climb the cliffs?'

'I doubt it.'

'If we called for help--'

'We could do that.'

They raised their voices, but the only answer was the crashing of the
waves and the cry of the sea-birds. The water was swirling at their
feet, and they drew back to the shelter of the cliffs. There they stood
in silence, watching.

'Mary,' said Wilton in a low voice, 'tell me one thing.'

'Yes, Jack?'

'Have you forgiven me?'

'Forgiven you! How can you ask at a moment like this? I love you with
all my heart and soul.'

He kissed her, and a strange look of peace came over his face.

'I am happy.'

'I, too.'

A fleck of foam touched her face, and she shivered.

'It was worth it,' he said quietly. 'If all misunderstandings are
cleared away and nothing can come between us again, it is a small price
to pay--unpleasant as it will be when it comes.'

'Perhaps--perhaps it will not be very unpleasant. They say that
drowning is an easy death.'

'I didn't mean drowning, dearest. I meant a cold in the head.'

'A cold in the head!'

He nodded gravely.

'I don't see how it can be avoided. You know how chilly it gets these
late summer nights. It will be a long time before we can get away.'

She laughed a shrill, unnatural laugh.

'You are talking like this to keep my courage up. You know in your
heart that there is no hope for us. Nothing can save us now. The water
will come creeping--creeping--'

'Let it creep! It can't get past that rock there.'

'What do you mean?'

'It can't. The tide doesn't come up any farther. I know, because I was
caught here last week.'

For a moment she looked at him without speaking. Then she uttered a cry
in which relief, surprise, and indignation were so nicely blended that
it would have been impossible to say which predominated.

He was eyeing the approaching waters with an indulgent smile.

'Why didn't you tell me?' she cried.

'I did tell you.'

'You know what I mean. Why did you let me go on thinking we were in
danger, when--'

'We _were_ in danger. We shall probably get pneumonia.'

'Isch!'

'There! You're sneezing already.'

'I am not sneezing. That was an exclamation of disgust.'

'It sounded like a sneeze. It must have been, for you've every reason
to sneeze, but why you should utter exclamations of disgust I cannot
imagine.'

'I'm disgusted with you--with your meanness. You deliberately tricked
me into saying--'

'Saying--'

She was silent.

'What you said was that you loved me with all your heart and soul. You
can't get away from that, and it's good enough for me.'

'Well, it's not true any longer.'

'Yes, it is,' said Wilton, comfortably; 'bless it.'

'It is not. I'm going right away now, and I shall never speak to you
again.'

She moved away from him, and prepared to sit down.

'There's a jelly-fish just where you're going to sit,' said Wilton.

'I don't care.'

'It will. I speak from experience, as one on whom you have sat so
often.'

'I'm not amused.'

'Have patience. I can be funnier than that.'

'Please don't talk to me.'

'Very well.'

She seated herself with her back to him. Dignity demanded reprisals, so
he seated himself with his back to her; and the futile ocean raged
towards them, and the wind grew chillier every minute.

Time passed. Darkness fell. The little bay became a black cavern,
dotted here and there with white, where the breeze whipped the surface
of the water.

Wilton sighed. It was lonely sitting there all by himself. How much
jollier it would have been if--

A hand touched his shoulder, and a voice spoke--meekly.

'Jack, dear, it--it's awfully cold. Don't you think if we were
to--snuggle up--'

He reached out and folded her in an embrace which would have aroused
the professional enthusiasm of Hackenschmidt and drawn guttural
congratulations from Zbysco. She creaked, but did not crack, beneath
the strain.

'That's much nicer,' she said, softly. 'Jack, I don't think the tide's
started even to think of going down yet.'

'I hope not,' said Wilton.




THE MIXER


I. _He Meets a Shy Gentleman_

Looking back, I always consider that my career as a dog proper really
started when I was bought for the sum of half a crown by the Shy Man.
That event marked the end of my puppyhood. The knowledge that I was
worth actual cash to somebody filled me with a sense of new
responsibilities. It sobered me. Besides, it was only after that
half-crown changed hands that I went out into the great world; and,
however interesting life may be in an East End public-house, it is only
when you go out into the world that you really broaden your mind and
begin to see things.

Within its limitations, my life had been singularly full and vivid. I
was born, as I say, in a public-house in the East End, and, however
lacking a public-house may be in refinement and the true culture, it
certainly provides plenty of excitement. Before I was six weeks old I
had upset three policemen by getting between their legs when they came
round to the side-door, thinking they had heard suspicious noises; and
I can still recall the interesting sensation of being chased seventeen
times round the yard with a broom-handle after a well-planned and
completely successful raid on the larder. These and other happenings of
a like nature soothed for the moment but could not cure the
restlessness which has always been so marked a trait in my character. I
have always been restless, unable to settle down in one place and
anxious to get on to the next thing. This may be due to a gipsy strain
in my ancestry--one of my uncles travelled with a circus--or it may be
the Artistic Temperament, acquired from a grandfather who, before dying
of a surfeit of paste in the property-room of the Bristol Coliseum,
which he was visiting in the course of a professional tour, had an
established reputation on the music-hall stage as one of Professor
Pond's Performing Poodles.

I owe the fullness and variety of my life to this restlessness of mine,
for I have repeatedly left comfortable homes in order to follow some
perfect stranger who looked as if he were on his way to somewhere
interesting. Sometimes I think I must have cat blood in me.

The Shy Man came into our yard one afternoon in April, while I was
sleeping with mother in the sun on an old sweater which we had borrowed
from Fred, one of the barmen. I heard mother growl, but I didn't take
any notice. Mother is what they call a good watch-dog, and she growls
at everybody except master. At first, when she used to do it, I would
get up and bark my head off, but not now. Life's too short to bark at
everybody who comes into our yard. It is behind the public-house, and
they keep empty bottles and things there, so people are always coming
and going.

Besides, I was tired. I had had a very busy morning, helping the men
bring in a lot of cases of beer, and running into the saloon to talk to
Fred and generally looking after things. So I was just dozing off
again, when I heard a voice say, 'Well, he's ugly enough!' Then I knew
that they were talking about me.

I have never disguised it from myself, and nobody has ever disguised it
from me, that I am not a handsome dog. Even mother never thought me
beautiful. She was no Gladys Cooper herself, but she never hesitated to
criticize my appearance. In fact, I have yet to meet anyone who did.
The first thing strangers say about me is, 'What an ugly dog!'

I don't know what I am. I have a bulldog kind of a face, but the rest
of me is terrier. I have a long tail which sticks straight up in the
air. My hair is wiry. My eyes are brown. I am jet black, with a white
chest. I once overheard Fred saying that I was a Gorgonzola
cheese-hound, and I have generally found Fred reliable in his
statements.

When I found that I was under discussion, I opened my eyes. Master was
standing there, looking down at me, and by his side the man who had
just said I was ugly enough. The man was a thin man, about the age of a
barman and smaller than a policeman. He had patched brown shoes and
black trousers.

'But he's got a sweet nature,' said master.

This was true, luckily for me. Mother always said, 'A dog without
influence or private means, if he is to make his way in the world, must
have either good looks or amiability.' But, according to her, I overdid
it. 'A dog,' she used to say, 'can have a good heart, without chumming
with every Tom, Dick, and Harry he meets. Your behaviour is sometimes
quite un-doglike.' Mother prided herself on being a one-man dog. She
kept herself to herself, and wouldn't kiss anybody except master--not
even Fred.

Now, I'm a mixer. I can't help it. It's my nature. I like men. I like
the taste of their boots, the smell of their legs, and the sound of
their voices. It may be weak of me, but a man has only to speak to me
and a sort of thrill goes right down my spine and sets my tail wagging.

I wagged it now. The man looked at me rather distantly. He didn't pat
me. I suspected--what I afterwards found to be the case--that he was
shy, so I jumped up at him to put him at his ease. Mother growled
again. I felt that she did not approve.

'Why, he's took quite a fancy to you already,' said master.

The man didn't say a word. He seemed to be brooding on something. He
was one of those silent men. He reminded me of Joe, the old dog down
the street at the grocer's shop, who lies at the door all day, blinking
and not speaking to anybody.

Master began to talk about me. It surprised me, the way he praised me.
I hadn't a suspicion he admired me so much. From what he said you would
have thought I had won prizes and ribbons at the Crystal Palace. But
the man didn't seem to be impressed. He kept on saying nothing.

When master had finished telling him what a wonderful dog I was till I
blushed, the man spoke.

'Less of it,' he said. 'Half a crown is my bid, and if he was an angel
from on high you couldn't get another ha'penny out of me. What about
it?'

A thrill went down my spine and out at my tail, for of course I saw now
what was happening. The man wanted to buy me and take me away. I looked
at master hopefully.

'He's more like a son to me than a dog,' said master, sort of wistful.

'It's his face that makes you feel that way,' said the man,
unsympathetically. 'If you had a son that's just how he would look.
Half a crown is my offer, and I'm in a hurry.'

'All right,' said master, with a sigh, 'though it's giving him away, a
valuable dog like that. Where's your half-crown?'

The man got a bit of rope and tied it round my neck.

I could hear mother barking advice and telling me to be a credit to the
family, but I was too excited to listen.

'Good-bye, mother,' I said. 'Good-bye, master. Good-bye, Fred. Good-bye
everybody. I'm off to see life. The Shy Man has bought me for half a
crown. Wow!'

I kept running round in circles and shouting, till the man gave me a
kick and told me to stop it.

So I did.

I don't know where we went, but it was a long way. I had never been off
our street before in my life and I didn't know the whole world was half
as big as that. We walked on and on, and the man jerked at my rope
whenever I wanted to stop and look at anything. He wouldn't even let me
pass the time of the day with dogs we met.

When we had gone about a hundred miles and were just going to turn in
at a dark doorway, a policeman suddenly stopped the man. I could feel
by the way the man pulled at my rope and tried to hurry on that he
didn't want to speak to the policeman. The more I saw of the man the
more I saw how shy he was.

'Hi!' said the policeman, and we had to stop.

'I've got a message for you, old pal,' said the policeman. 'It's from
the Board of Health. They told me to tell you you needed a change of
air. See?'

'All right!' said the man.

'And take it as soon as you like. Else you'll find you'll get it given
you. See?'

I looked at the man with a good deal of respect. He was evidently
someone very important, if they worried so about his health.

'I'm going down to the country tonight,' said the man.

The policeman seemed pleased.

'That's a bit of luck for the country,' he said. 'Don't go changing
your mind.'

And we walked on, and went in at the dark doorway, and climbed about a
million stairs and went into a room that smelt of rats. The man sat
down and swore a little, and I sat and looked at him.

Presently I couldn't keep it in any longer.

'Do we live here?' I said. 'Is it true we're going to the country?
Wasn't that policeman a good sort? Don't you like policemen? I knew
lots of policemen at the public-house. Are there any other dogs here?
What is there for dinner? What's in that cupboard? When are you going
to take me out for another run? May I go out and see if I can find a
cat?'

'Stop that yelping,' he said.

'When we go to the country, where shall we live? Are you going to be a
caretaker at a house? Fred's father is a caretaker at a big house in
Kent. I've heard Fred talk about it. You didn't meet Fred when you came
to the public-house, did you? You would like Fred. I like Fred. Mother
likes Fred. We all like Fred.'

I was going on to tell him a lot more about Fred, who had always been
one of my warmest friends, when he suddenly got hold of a stick and
walloped me with it.

'You keep quiet when you're told,' he said.

He really was the shyest man I had ever met. It seemed to hurt him to
be spoken to. However, he was the boss, and I had to humour him, so I
didn't say any more.

We went down to the country that night, just as the man had told the
policeman we would. I was all worked up, for I had heard so much about
the country from Fred that I had always wanted to go there. Fred used
to go off on a motor-bicycle sometimes to spend the night with his
father in Kent, and once he brought back a squirrel with him, which I
thought was for me to eat, but mother said no. 'The first thing a dog
has to learn,' mother used often to say, 'is that the whole world
wasn't created for him to eat.'

It was quite dark when we got to the country, but the man seemed to
know where to go. He pulled at my rope, and we began to walk along a
road with no people in it at all. We walked on and on, but it was all
so new to me that I forgot how tired I was. I could feel my mind
broadening with every step I took.

Every now and then we would pass a very big house, which looked as if
it was empty, but I knew that there was a caretaker inside, because of
Fred's father. These big houses belong to very rich people, but they
don't want to live in them till the summer, so they put in caretakers,
and the caretakers have a dog to keep off burglars. I wondered if that
was what I had been brought here for.

'Are you going to be a caretaker?' I asked the man.

'Shut up,' he said.

So I shut up.

After we had been walking a long time, we came to a cottage. A man came
out. My man seemed to know him, for he called him Bill. I was quite
surprised to see the man was not at all shy with Bill. They seemed very
friendly.

'Is that him?' said Bill, looking at me.

'Bought him this afternoon,' said the man.

'Well,' said Bill, 'he's ugly enough. He looks fierce. If you want a
dog, he's the sort of dog you want. But what do you want one for? It
seems to me it's a lot of trouble to take, when there's no need of any
trouble at all. Why not do what I've always wanted to do? What's wrong
with just fixing the dog, same as it's always done, and walking in and
helping yourself?'

'I'll tell you what's wrong,' said the man. 'To start with, you can't
get at the dog to fix him except by day, when they let him out. At
night he's shut up inside the house. And suppose you do fix him during
the day what happens then? Either the bloke gets another before night,
or else he sits up all night with a gun. It isn't like as if these
blokes was ordinary blokes. They're down here to look after the house.
That's their job, and they don't take any chances.'

It was the longest speech I had ever heard the man make, and it seemed
to impress Bill. He was quite humble.

'I didn't think of that,' he said. 'We'd best start in to train this
tyke at once.'

Mother often used to say, when I went on about wanting to go out into
the world and see life, 'You'll be sorry when you do. The world isn't
all bones and liver.' And I hadn't been living with the man and Bill in
their cottage long before I found out how right she was.

It was the man's shyness that made all the trouble. It seemed as if he
hated to be taken notice of.

It started on my very first night at the cottage. I had fallen asleep
in the kitchen, tired out after all the excitement of the day and the
long walks I had had, when something woke me with a start. It was
somebody scratching at the window, trying to get in.

Well, I ask you, I ask any dog, what would you have done in my place?
Ever since I was old enough to listen, mother had told me over and over
again what I must do in a case like this. It is the A B C of a dog's
education. 'If you are in a room and you hear anyone trying to get in,'
mother used to say, 'bark. It may be someone who has business there, or
it may not. Bark first, and inquire afterwards. Dogs were made to be
heard and not seen.'

I lifted my head and yelled. I have a good, deep voice, due to a hound
strain in my pedigree, and at the public-house, when there was a full
moon, I have often had people leaning out of the windows and saying
things all down the street. I took a deep breath and let it go.

'Man!' I shouted. 'Bill! Man! Come quick! Here's a burglar getting in!'

Then somebody struck a light, and it was the man himself. He had come
in through the window.

He picked up a stick, and he walloped me. I couldn't understand it. I
couldn't see where I had done the wrong thing. But he was the boss, so
there was nothing to be said.

If you'll believe me, that same thing happened every night. Every
single night! And sometimes twice or three times before morning. And
every time I would bark my loudest and the man would strike a light and
wallop me. The thing was baffling. I couldn't possibly have mistaken
what mother had said to me. She said it too often for that. Bark! Bark!
Bark! It was the main plank of her whole system of education. And yet,
here I was, getting walloped every night for doing it.

I thought it out till my head ached, and finally I got it right. I
began to see that mother's outlook was narrow. No doubt, living with a
man like master at the public-house, a man without a trace of shyness
in his composition, barking was all right. But circumstances alter
cases. I belonged to a man who was a mass of nerves, who got the jumps
if you spoke to him. What I had to do was to forget the training I had
had from mother, sound as it no doubt was as a general thing, and to
adapt myself to the needs of the particular man who had happened to buy
me. I had tried mother's way, and all it had brought me was walloping,
so now I would think for myself.

So next night, when I heard the window go, I lay there without a word,
though it went against all my better feelings. I didn't even growl.
Someone came in and moved about in the dark, with a lantern, but,
though I smelt that it was the man, I didn't ask him a single question.
And presently the man lit a light and came over to me and gave me a
pat, which was a thing he had never done before.

'Good dog!' he said. 'Now you can have this.'

And he let me lick out the saucepan in which the dinner had been
cooked.

After that, we got on fine. Whenever I heard anyone at the window I
just kept curled up and took no notice, and every time I got a bone or
something good. It was easy, once you had got the hang of things.

It was about a week after that the man took me out one morning, and we
walked a long way till we turned in at some big gates and went along a
very smooth road till we came to a great house, standing all by itself
in the middle of a whole lot of country. There was a big lawn in front
of it, and all round there were fields and trees, and at the back a
great wood.

The man rang a bell, and the door opened, and an old man came out.

'Well?' he said, not very cordially.

'I thought you might want to buy a good watch-dog,' said the man.

'Well, that's queer, your saying that,' said the caretaker. 'It's a
coincidence. That's exactly what I do want to buy. I was just thinking
of going along and trying to get one. My old dog picked up something
this morning that he oughtn't to have, and he's dead, poor feller.'

'Poor feller,' said the man. 'Found an old bone with phosphorus on it,
I guess.'

'What do you want for this one?'

'Five shillings.'

'Is he a good watch-dog?'

'He's a grand watch-dog.'

'He looks fierce enough.'

'Ah!'

So the caretaker gave the man his five shillings, and the man went off
and left me.

At first the newness of everything and the unaccustomed smells and
getting to know the caretaker, who was a nice old man, prevented my
missing the man, but as the day went on and I began to realize that he
had gone and would never come back, I got very depressed. I pattered
all over the house, whining. It was a most interesting house, bigger
than I thought a house could possibly be, but it couldn't cheer me up.
You may think it strange that I should pine for the man, after all the
wallopings he had given me, and it is odd, when you come to think of
it. But dogs are dogs, and they are built like that. By the time it was
evening I was thoroughly miserable. I found a shoe and an old
clothes-brush in one of the rooms, but could eat nothing. I just sat
and moped.

It's a funny thing, but it seems as if it always happened that just
when you are feeling most miserable, something nice happens. As I sat
there, there came from outside the sound of a motor-bicycle, and
somebody shouted.

It was dear old Fred, my old pal Fred, the best old boy that ever
stepped. I recognized his voice in a second, and I was scratching at
the door before the old man had time to get up out of his chair.

Well, well, well! That was a pleasant surprise! I ran five times round
the lawn without stopping, and then I came back and jumped up at him.

'What are you doing down here, Fred?' I said. 'Is this caretaker your
father? Have you seen the rabbits in the wood? How long are you going
to stop? How's mother? I like the country. Have you come all the way
from the public-house? I'm living here now. Your father gave five
shillings for me. That's twice as much as I was worth when I saw you
last.'

'Why, it's young Nigger!' That was what they called me at the saloon.
'What are you doing here? Where did you get this dog, father?'

'A man sold him to me this morning. Poor old Bob got poisoned. This one
ought to be just as good a watch-dog. He barks loud enough.'

'He should be. His mother is the best watch-dog in London. This
cheese-hound used to belong to the boss. Funny him getting down here.'

We went into the house and had supper. And after supper we sat and
talked. Fred was only down for the night, he said, because the boss
wanted him back next day.

'And I'd sooner have my job, than yours, dad,' he said. 'Of all the
lonely places! I wonder you aren't scared of burglars.'

'I've my shot-gun, and there's the dog. I might be scared if it wasn't
for him, but he kind of gives me confidence. Old Bob was the same. Dogs
are a comfort in the country.'

'Get many tramps here?'

'I've only seen one in two months, and that's the feller who sold me
the dog here.'

As they were talking about the man, I asked Fred if he knew him. They
might have met at the public-house, when the man was buying me from the
boss.

'You would like him,' I said. 'I wish you could have met.'

They both looked at me.

'What's he growling at?' asked Fred. 'Think he heard something?'

The old man laughed.

'He wasn't growling. He was talking in his sleep. You're nervous, Fred.
It comes of living in the city.'

'Well, I am. I like this place in the daytime, but it gives me the pip
at night. It's so quiet. How you can stand it here all the time, I
can't understand. Two nights of it would have me seeing things.'

His father laughed.

'If you feel like that, Fred, you had better take the gun to bed with
you. I shall be quite happy without it.'

'I will,' said Fred. 'I'll take six if you've got them.'

And after that they went upstairs. I had a basket in the hall, which
had belonged to Bob, the dog who had got poisoned. It was a comfortable
basket, but I was so excited at having met Fred again that I couldn't
sleep. Besides, there was a smell of mice somewhere, and I had to move
around, trying to place it.

I was just sniffing at a place in the wall, when I heard a scratching
noise. At first I thought it was the mice working in a different place,
but, when I listened, I found that the sound came from the window.
Somebody was doing something to it from outside.

If it had been mother, she would have lifted the roof off right there,
and so should I, if it hadn't been for what the man had taught me. I
didn't think it possible that this could be the man come back, for he
had gone away and said nothing about ever seeing me again. But I didn't
bark. I stopped where I was and listened. And presently the window came
open, and somebody began to climb in.

I gave a good sniff, and I knew it was the man.

I was so delighted that for a moment I nearly forgot myself and shouted
with joy, but I remembered in time how shy he was, and stopped myself.
But I ran to him and jumped up quite quietly, and he told me to lie
down. I was disappointed that he didn't seem more pleased to see me. I
lay down.

It was very dark, but he had brought a lantern with him, and I could
see him moving about the room, picking things up and putting them in a
bag which he had brought with him. Every now and then he would stop and
listen, and then he would start moving round again. He was very quick
about it, but very quiet. It was plain that he didn't want Fred or his
father to come down and find him.

I kept thinking about this peculiarity of his while I watched him. I
suppose, being chummy myself, I find it hard to understand that
everybody else in the world isn't chummy too. Of course, my experience
at the public-house had taught me that men are just as different from
each other as dogs. If I chewed master's shoe, for instance, he used to
kick me; but if I chewed Fred's, Fred would tickle me under the ear.
And, similarly, some men are shy and some men are mixers. I quite
appreciated that, but I couldn't help feeling that the man carried
shyness to a point where it became morbid. And he didn't give himself a
chance to cure himself of it. That was the point. Imagine a man hating
to meet people so much that he never visited their houses till the
middle of the night, when they were in bed and asleep. It was silly.
Shyness has always been something so outside my nature that I suppose I
have never really been able to look at it sympathetically. I have
always held the view that you can get over it if you make an effort.
The trouble with the man was that he wouldn't make an effort. He went
out of his way to avoid meeting people.

I was fond of the man. He was the sort of person you never get to know
very well, but we had been together for quite a while, and I wouldn't
have been a dog if I hadn't got attached to him.

As I sat and watched him creep about the room, it suddenly came to me
that here was a chance of doing him a real good turn in spite of
himself. Fred was upstairs, and Fred, as I knew by experience, was the
easiest man to get along with in the world. Nobody could be shy with
Fred. I felt that if only I could bring him and the man together, they
would get along splendidly, and it would teach the man not to be silly
and avoid people. It would help to give him the confidence which he
needed. I had seen him with Bill, and I knew that he could be perfectly
natural and easy when he liked.

It was true that the man might object at first, but after a while he
would see that I had acted simply for his good, and would be grateful.

The difficulty was, how to get Fred down without scaring the man. I
knew that if I shouted he wouldn't wait, but would be out of the window
and away before Fred could get there. What I had to do was to go to
Fred's room, explain the whole situation quietly to him, and ask him to
come down and make himself pleasant.

The man was far too busy to pay any attention to me. He was kneeling in
a corner with his back to me, putting something in his bag. I seized
the opportunity to steal softly from the room.

Fred's door was shut, and I could hear him snoring. I scratched gently,
and then harder, till I heard the snores stop. He got out of bed and
opened the door.

'Don't make a noise,' I whispered. 'Come on downstairs. I want you to
meet a friend of mine.'

At first he was quite peevish.

'What's the idea,' he said, 'coming and spoiling a man's beauty-sleep?
Get out.'

He actually started to go back into the room.

'No, honestly, Fred,' I said, 'I'm not fooling you. There is a man
downstairs. He got in through the window. I want you to meet him. He's
very shy, and I think it will do him good to have a chat with you.'

'What are you whining about?' Fred began, and then he broke off
suddenly and listened. We could both hear the man's footsteps as he
moved about.

Fred jumped back into the room. He came out, carrying something. He
didn't say any more but started to go downstairs, very quiet, and I
went after him.

There was the man, still putting things in his bag. I was just going to
introduce Fred, when Fred, the silly ass, gave a great yell.

I could have bitten him.

'What did you want to do that for, you chump?' I said 'I told you he
was shy. Now you've scared him.'

He certainly had. The man was out of the window quicker than you would
have believed possible. He just flew out. I called after him that it
was only Fred and me, but at that moment a gun went off with a
tremendous bang, so he couldn't have heard me.

I was pretty sick about it. The whole thing had gone wrong. Fred seemed
to have lost his head entirely. He was behaving like a perfect ass.
Naturally the man had been frightened with him carrying on in that way.
I jumped out of the window to see if I could find the man and explain,
but he was gone. Fred jumped out after me, and nearly squashed me.

It was pitch dark out there. I couldn't see a thing. But I knew the man
could not have gone far, or I should have heard him. I started to sniff
round on the chance of picking up his trail. It wasn't long before I
struck it.

Fred's father had come down now, and they were running about. The old
man had a light. I followed the trail, and it ended at a large
cedar-tree, not far from the house. I stood underneath it and looked
up, but of course I could not see anything.

'Are you up there?' I shouted. 'There's nothing to be scared at. It was
only Fred. He's an old pal of mine. He works at the place where you
bought me. His gun went off by accident. He won't hurt you.'

There wasn't a sound. I began to think I must have made a mistake.

'He's got away,' I heard Fred say to his father, and just as he said it
I caught a faint sound of someone moving in the branches above me.

'No he hasn't!' I shouted. 'He's up this tree.'

'I believe the dog's found him, dad!'

'Yes, he's up here. Come along and meet him.'

Fred came to the foot of the tree.

'You up there,' he said, 'come along down.'

Not a sound from the tree.

'It's all right,' I explained, 'he _is_ up there, but he's very shy. Ask
him again.'

'All right,' said Fred. 'Stay there if you want to. But I'm going to
shoot off this gun into the branches just for fun.'

And then the man started to come down. As soon as he touched the ground
I jumped up at him.

'This is fine!' I said 'Here's my friend Fred. You'll like him.'

But it wasn't any good. They didn't get along together at all. They
hardly spoke. The man went into the house, and Fred went after him,
carrying his gun. And when they got into the house it was just the
same. The man sat in one chair, and Fred sat in another, and after a
long time some men came in a motor-car, and the man went away with
them. He didn't say good-bye to me.

When he had gone, Fred and his father made a great fuss of me. I
couldn't understand it. Men are so odd. The man wasn't a bit pleased
that I had brought him and Fred together, but Fred seemed as if he
couldn't do enough for me for having introduced him to the man.
However, Fred's father produced some cold ham--my favourite dish--and
gave me quite a lot of it, so I stopped worrying over the thing. As
mother used to say, 'Don't bother your head about what doesn't concern
you. The only thing a dog need concern himself with is the
bill-of-fare. Eat your bun, and don't make yourself busy about other
people's affairs.' Mother's was in some ways a narrow outlook, but she
had a great fund of sterling common sense.



II. _He Moves in Society_

It was one of those things which are really nobody's fault. It was not
the chauffeur's fault, and it was not mine. I was having a friendly
turn-up with a pal of mine on the side-walk; he ran across the road; I
ran after him; and the car came round the corner and hit me. It must
have been going pretty slow, or I should have been killed. As it was, I
just had the breath knocked out of me. You know how you feel when the
butcher catches you just as you are edging out of the shop with a bit
of meat. It was like that.

I wasn't taking much interest in things for awhile, but when I did I
found that I was the centre of a group of three--the chauffeur, a small
boy, and the small boy's nurse.

The small boy was very well-dressed, and looked delicate. He was
crying.

'Poor doggie,' he said, 'poor doggie.'

'It wasn't my fault, Master Peter,' said the chauffeur respectfully.
'He run out into the road before I seen him.'

'That's right,' I put in, for I didn't want to get the man into
trouble.

'Oh, he's not dead,' said the small boy. 'He barked.'

'He growled,' said the nurse. 'Come away, Master Peter. He might bite
you.'

Women are trying sometimes. It is almost as if they deliberately
misunderstood.

'I won't come away. I'm going to take him home with me and send for the
doctor to come and see him. He's going to be my dog.'

This sounded all right. Goodness knows I am no snob, and can rough it
when required, but I do like comfort when it comes my way, and it
seemed to me that this was where I got it. And I liked the boy. He was
the right sort.

The nurse, a very unpleasant woman, had to make objections.

'Master Peter! You can't take him home, a great, rough, fierce, common
dog! What would your mother say?'

'I'm going to take him home,' repeated the child, with a determination
which I heartily admired, 'and he's going to be my dog. I shall call
him Fido.'

There's always a catch in these good things. Fido is a name I
particularly detest. All dogs do. There was a dog called that that I
knew once, and he used to get awfully sick when we shouted it out after
him in the street. No doubt there have been respectable dogs called
Fido, but to my mind it is a name like Aubrey or Clarence. You may be
able to live it down, but you start handicapped. However, one must take
the rough with the smooth, and I was prepared to yield the point.

'If you wait, Master Peter, your father will buy you a beautiful,
lovely dog....'

'I don't want a beautiful, lovely dog. I want this dog.'

The slur did not wound me. I have no illusions about my looks. Mine is
an honest, but not a beautiful, face.

'It's no use talking,' said the chauffeur, grinning. 'He means to have
him. Shove him in, and let's be getting back, or they'll be thinking
His Nibs has been kidnapped.'

So I was carried to the car. I could have walked, but I had an idea
that I had better not. I had made my hit as a crippled dog, and a
crippled dog I intended to remain till things got more settled down.

The chauffeur started the car off again. What with the shock I had had
and the luxury of riding in a motor-car, I was a little distrait, and I
could not say how far we went. But it must have been miles and miles,
for it seemed a long time afterwards that we stopped at the biggest
house I have ever seen. There were smooth lawns and flower-beds, and
men in overalls, and fountains and trees, and, away to the right,
kennels with about a million dogs in them, all pushing their noses
through the bars and shouting. They all wanted to know who I was and
what prizes I had won, and then I realized that I was moving in high
society.

I let the small boy pick me up and carry me into the house, though it
was all he could do, poor kid, for I was some weight. He staggered up
the steps and along a great hall, and then let me flop on the carpet of
the most beautiful room you ever saw. The carpet was a yard thick.

There was a woman sitting in a chair, and as soon as she saw me she
gave a shriek.

'I told Master Peter you would not be pleased, m'lady,' said the nurse,
who seemed to have taken a positive dislike to me, 'but he would bring
the nasty brute home.'

'He's not a nasty brute, mother. He's my dog, and his name's Fido. John
ran over him in the car, and I brought him home to live with us. I love
him.'

This seemed to make an impression. Peter's mother looked as if she were
weakening.

'But, Peter, dear, I don't know what your father will say. He's so
particular about dogs. All his dogs are prize-winners, pedigree dogs.
This is such a mongrel.'

'A nasty, rough, ugly, common dog, m'lady,' said the nurse, sticking
her oar in in an absolutely uncalled-for way.

Just then a man came into the room.

'What on earth?' he said, catching sight of me.

'It's a dog Peter has brought home. He says he wants to keep him.'

'I'm going to keep him,' corrected Peter firmly.

I do like a child that knows his own mind. I was getting fonder of
Peter every minute. I reached up and licked his hand.

'See! He knows he's my dog, don't you, Fido? He licked me.'

'But, Peter, he looks so fierce.' This, unfortunately, is true. I do
look fierce. It is rather a misfortune for a perfectly peaceful dog.
'I'm sure it's not safe your having him.'

'He's my dog, and his name's Fido. I am going to tell cook to give him
a bone.'

His mother looked at his father, who gave rather a nasty laugh.

'My dear Helen,' he said, 'ever since Peter was born, ten years ago, he
has not asked for a single thing, to the best of my recollection, which
he has not got. Let us be consistent. I don't approve of this
caricature of a dog, but if Peter wants him, I suppose he must have
him.'

'Very well. But the first sign of viciousness he shows, he shall be
shot. He makes me nervous.'

So they left it at that, and I went off with Peter to get my bone.

After lunch, he took me to the kennels to introduce me to the other
dogs. I had to go, but I knew it would not be pleasant, and it wasn't.
Any dog will tell you what these prize-ribbon dogs are like. Their
heads are so swelled they have to go into their kennels backwards.

It was just as I had expected. There were mastiffs, terriers, poodles,
spaniels, bulldogs, sheepdogs, and every other kind of dog you can
imagine, all prize-winners at a hundred shows, and every single dog in
the place just shoved his head back and laughed himself sick. I never
felt so small in my life, and I was glad when it was over and Peter
took me off to the stables.

I was just feeling that I never wanted to see another dog in my life,
when a terrier ran out, shouting. As soon as he saw me, he came up
inquiringly, walking very stiff-legged, as terriers do when they see a
stranger.

'Well,' I said, 'and what particular sort of a prize-winner are you?
Tell me all about the ribbons they gave you at the Crystal Palace, and
let's get it over.'

He laughed in a way that did me good.

'Guess again!' he said. 'Did you take me for one of the nuts in the
kennels? My name's Jack, and I belong to one of the grooms.'

'What!' I cried. 'You aren't Champion Bowlegs Royal or anything of that
sort! I'm glad to meet you.'

So we rubbed noses as friendly as you please. It was a treat meeting
one of one's own sort. I had had enough of those high-toned dogs who
look at you as if you were something the garbage-man had forgotten to
take away.

'So you've been talking to the swells, have you?' said Jack.

'He would take me,' I said, pointing to Peter.

'Oh, you're his latest, are you? Then you're all right--while it
lasts.'

'How do you mean, while it lasts?'

'Well, I'll tell you what happened to me. Young Peter took a great
fancy to me once. Couldn't do enough for me for a while. Then he got
tired of me, and out I went. You see, the trouble is that while he's a
perfectly good kid, he has always had everything he wanted since he was
born, and he gets tired of things pretty easy. It was a toy railway
that finished me. Directly he got that, I might not have been on the
earth. It was lucky for me that Dick, my present old man, happened to
want a dog to keep down the rats, or goodness knows what might not have
happened to me. They aren't keen on dogs here unless they've pulled
down enough blue ribbons to sink a ship, and mongrels like you and
me--no offence--don't last long. I expect you noticed that the
grown-ups didn't exactly cheer when you arrived?'

'They weren't chummy.'

'Well take it from me, your only chance is to make them chummy. If you
do something to please them, they might let you stay on, even though
Peter was tired of you.'

'What sort of thing?'

'That's for you to think out. I couldn't find one. I might tell you to
save Peter from drowning. You don't need a pedigree to do that. But you
can't drag the kid to the lake and push him in. That's the trouble. A
dog gets so few opportunities. But, take it from me, if you don't do
something within two weeks to make yourself solid with the adults, you
can make your will. In two weeks Peter will have forgotten all about
you. It's not his fault. It's the way he has been brought up. His
father has all the money on earth, and Peter's the only child. You
can't blame him. All I say is, look out for yourself. Well, I'm glad to
have met you. Drop in again when you can. I can give you some good
ratting, and I have a bone or two put away. So long.'

       *       *       *       *       *

It worried me badly what Jack had said. I couldn't get it out of my
mind. If it hadn't been for that, I should have had a great time, for
Peter certainly made a lot of fuss of me. He treated me as if I were
the only friend he had.

And, in a way, I was. When you are the only son of a man who has all
the money in the world, it seems that you aren't allowed to be like an
ordinary kid. They coop you up, as if you were something precious that
would be contaminated by contact with other children. In all the time
that I was at the house I never met another child. Peter had everything
in the world, except someone of his own age to go round with; and that
made him different from any of the kids I had known.

He liked talking to me. I was the only person round who really
understood him. He would talk by the hour and I would listen with my
tongue hanging out and nod now and then.

It was worth listening to, what he used to tell me. He told me the most
surprising things. I didn't know, for instance, that there were any Red
Indians in England but he said there was a chief named Big Cloud who
lived in the rhododendron bushes by the lake. I never found him, though
I went carefully through them one day. He also said that there were
pirates on the island in the lake. I never saw them either.

What he liked telling me about best was the city of gold and precious
stones which you came to if you walked far enough through the woods at
the back of the stables. He was always meaning to go off there some
day, and, from the way he described it, I didn't blame him. It was
certainly a pretty good city. It was just right for dogs, too, he said,
having bones and liver and sweet cakes there and everything else a dog
could want. It used to make my mouth water to listen to him.

We were never apart. I was with him all day, and I slept on the mat in
his room at night. But all the time I couldn't get out of my mind what
Jack had said. I nearly did once, for it seemed to me that I was so
necessary to Peter that nothing could separate us; but just as I was
feeling safe his father gave him a toy aeroplane, which flew when you
wound it up. The day he got it, I might not have been on the earth. I
trailed along, but he hadn't a word to say to me.

Well, something went wrong with the aeroplane the second day, and it
wouldn't fly, and then I was in solid again; but I had done some hard
thinking and I knew just where I stood. I was the newest toy, that's
what I was, and something newer might come along at any moment, and
then it would be the finish for me. The only thing for me was to do
something to impress the adults, just as Jack had said.

Goodness knows I tried. But everything I did turned out wrong. There
seemed to be a fate about it. One morning, for example, I was trotting
round the house early, and I met a fellow I could have sworn was a
burglar. He wasn't one of the family, and he wasn't one of the
servants, and he was hanging round the house in a most suspicious way.
I chased him up a tree, and it wasn't till the family came down to
breakfast, two hours later, that I found that he was a guest who had
arrived overnight, and had come out early to enjoy the freshness of the
morning and the sun shining on the lake, he being that sort of man.
That didn't help me much.

Next, I got in wrong with the boss, Peter's father. I don't know why. I
met him out in the park with another man, both carrying bundles of
sticks and looking very serious and earnest. Just as I reached him, the
boss lifted one of the sticks and hit a small white ball with it. He
had never seemed to want to play with me before, and I took it as a
great compliment. I raced after the ball, which he had hit quite a long
way, picked it up in my mouth, and brought it back to him. I laid it at
his feet, and smiled up at him.

'Hit it again,' I said.

He wasn't pleased at all. He said all sorts of things and tried to kick
me, and that night, when he thought I was not listening, I heard him
telling his wife that I was a pest and would have to be got rid of.
That made me think.

And then I put the lid on it. With the best intentions in the world I
got myself into such a mess that I thought the end had come.

It happened one afternoon in the drawing-room. There were visitors that
day--women; and women seem fatal to me. I was in the background, trying
not to be seen, for, though I had been brought in by Peter, the family
never liked my coming into the drawing-room. I was hoping for a piece
of cake and not paying much attention to the conversation, which was
all about somebody called Toto, whom I had not met. Peter's mother said
Toto was a sweet little darling, he was; and one of the visitors said
Toto had not been at all himself that day and she was quite worried.
And a good lot more about how all that Toto would ever take for dinner
was a little white meat of chicken, chopped up fine. It was not very
interesting, and I had allowed my attention to wander.

And just then, peeping round the corner of my chair to see if there
were any signs of cake, what should I see but a great beastly brute of
a rat. It was standing right beside the visitor, drinking milk out of a
saucer, if you please!

I may have my faults, but procrastination in the presence of rats is
not one of them. I didn't hesitate for a second. Here was my chance. If
there is one thing women hate, it is a rat. Mother always used to say,
'If you want to succeed in life, please the women. They are the real
bosses. The men don't count.' By eliminating this rodent I should earn
the gratitude and esteem of Peter's mother, and, if I did that, it did
not matter what Peter's father thought of me.

I sprang.

The rat hadn't a chance to get away. I was right on to him. I got hold
of his neck, gave him a couple of shakes, and chucked him across the
room. Then I ran across to finish him off.

Just as I reached him, he sat up and barked at me. I was never so taken
aback in my life. I pulled up short and stared at him.

'I'm sure I beg your pardon, sir,' I said apologetically. 'I thought
you were a rat.'

And then everything broke loose. Somebody got me by the collar,
somebody else hit me on the head with a parasol, and somebody else
kicked me in the ribs. Everybody talked and shouted at the same time.

'Poor darling Toto!' cried the visitor, snatching up the little animal.
'Did the great savage brute try to murder you!'

'So absolutely unprovoked!'

'He just flew at the poor little thing!'

It was no good my trying to explain. Any dog in my place would have
made the same mistake. The creature was a toy-dog of one of those
extraordinary breeds--a prize-winner and champion, and so on, of
course, and worth his weight in gold. I would have done better to bite
the visitor than Toto. That much I gathered from the general run of the
conversation, and then, having discovered that the door was shut, I
edged under the sofa. I was embarrassed.

'That settles it!' said Peter's mother. 'The dog is not safe. He must
be shot.'

Peter gave a yell at this, but for once he didn't swing the voting an
inch.

'Be quiet, Peter,' said his mother. 'It is not safe for you to have
such a dog. He may be mad.'

Women are very unreasonable.

Toto, of course, wouldn't say a word to explain how the mistake arose.
He was sitting on the visitor's lap, shrieking about what he would have
done to me if they hadn't separated us.

Somebody felt cautiously under the sofa. I recognized the shoes of
Weeks, the butler. I suppose they had rung for him to come and take me,
and I could see that he wasn't half liking it. I was sorry for Weeks,
who was a friend of mine, so I licked his hand, and that seemed to
cheer him up a whole lot.

'I have him now, madam,' I heard him say.

'Take him to the stables and tie him up, Weeks, and tell one of the men
to bring his gun and shoot him. He is not safe.'

A few minutes later I was in an empty stall, tied up to the manger.

It was all over. It had been pleasant while it lasted, but I had
reached the end of my tether now. I don't think I was frightened, but a
sense of pathos stole over me. I had meant so well. It seemed as if
good intentions went for nothing in this world. I had tried so hard to
please everybody, and this was the result--tied up in a dark stable,
waiting for the end.

The shadows lengthened in the stable-yard, and still nobody came. I
began to wonder if they had forgotten me, and presently, in spite of
myself, a faint hope began to spring up inside me that this might mean
that I was not to be shot after all. Perhaps Toto at the eleventh hour
had explained everything.

And then footsteps sounded outside, and the hope died away. I shut my
eyes.

Somebody put his arms round my neck, and my nose touched a warm cheek.
I opened my eyes. It was not the man with the gun come to shoot me. It
was Peter. He was breathing very hard, and he had been crying.

'Quiet!' he whispered.

He began to untie the rope.

'You must keep quite quiet, or they will hear us, and then we shall be
stopped. I'm going to take you into the woods, and we'll walk and walk
until we come to the city I told you about that's all gold and
diamonds, and we'll live there for the rest of our lives, and no one
will be able to hurt us. But you must keep very quiet.'

He went to the stable-gate and looked out. Then he gave a little
whistle to me to come after him. And we started out to find the city.

The woods were a long way away, down a hill of long grass and across a
stream; and we went very carefully, keeping in the shadows and running
across the open spaces. And every now and then we would stop and look
back, but there was nobody to be seen. The sun was setting, and
everything was very cool and quiet.

Presently we came to the stream and crossed it by a little wooden
bridge, and then we were in the woods, where nobody could see us.

I had never been in the woods before, and everything was very new and
exciting to me. There were squirrels and rabbits and birds, more than I
had ever seen in my life, and little things that buzzed and flew and
tickled my ears. I wanted to rush about and look at everything, but
Peter called to me, and I came to heel. He knew where we were going,
and I didn't, so I let him lead.

We went very slowly. The wood got thicker and thicker the farther we
got into it. There were bushes that were difficult to push through, and
long branches, covered with thorns, that reached out at you and tore at
you when you tried to get away. And soon it was quite dark, so dark
that I could see nothing, not even Peter, though he was so close. We
went slower and slower, and the darkness was full of queer noises. From
time to time Peter would stop, and I would run to him and put my nose
in his hand. At first he patted me, but after a while he did not pat me
any more, but just gave me his hand to lick, as if it was too much for
him to lift it. I think he was getting very tired. He was quite a small
boy and not strong, and we had walked a long way.

It seemed to be getting darker and darker. I could hear the sound of
Peter's footsteps, and they seemed to drag as he forced his way through
the bushes. And then, quite suddenly, he sat down without any warning,
and when I ran up I heard him crying.

I suppose there are lots of dogs who would have known exactly the right
thing to do, but I could not think of anything except to put my nose
against his cheek and whine. He put his arm round my neck, and for a
long time we stayed like that, saying nothing. It seemed to comfort
him, for after a time he stopped crying.

I did not bother him by asking about the wonderful city where we were
going, for he was so tired. But I could not help wondering if we were
near it. There was not a sign of any city, nothing but darkness and odd
noises and the wind singing in the trees. Curious little animals, such
as I had never smelt before, came creeping out of the bushes to look at
us. I would have chased them, but Peter's arm was round my neck and I
could not leave him. But when something that smelt like a rabbit came
so near that I could have reached out a paw and touched it, I turned my
head and snapped; and then they all scurried back into the bushes and
there were no more noises.

There was a long silence. Then Peter gave a great gulp.

'I'm not frightened,' he said. 'I'm not!'

I shoved my head closer against his chest. There was another silence
for a long time.

'I'm going to pretend we have been captured by brigands,' said Peter at
last. 'Are you listening? There were three of them, great big men with
beards, and they crept up behind me and snatched me up and took me out
here to their lair. This is their lair. One was called Dick, the
others' names were Ted and Alfred. They took hold of me and brought me
all the way through the wood till we got here, and then they went off,
meaning to come back soon. And while they were away, you missed me and
tracked me through the woods till you found me here. And then the
brigands came back, and they didn't know you were here, and you kept
quite quiet till Dick was quite near, and then you jumped out and bit
him and he ran away. And then you bit Ted and you bit Alfred, and they
ran away too. And so we were left all alone, and I was quite safe
because you were here to look after me. And then--And then--'

His voice died away, and the arm that was round my neck went limp, and
I could hear by his breathing that he was asleep. His head was resting
on my back, but I didn't move. I wriggled a little closer to make him
as comfortable as I could, and then I went to sleep myself.

I didn't sleep very well. I had funny dreams all the time, thinking
these little animals were creeping up close enough out of the bushes
for me to get a snap at them without disturbing Peter.

If I woke once, I woke a dozen times, but there was never anything
there. The wind sang in the trees and the bushes rustled, and far away
in the distance the frogs were calling.

And then I woke once more with the feeling that this time something
really was coming through the bushes. I lifted my head as far as I
could, and listened. For a little while nothing happened, and then,
straight in front of me, I saw lights. And there was a sound of
trampling in the undergrowth.

It was no time to think about not waking Peter. This was something
definite, something that had to be attended to quick. I was up with a
jump, yelling. Peter rolled off my back and woke up, and he sat there
listening, while I stood with my front paws on him and shouted at the
men. I was bristling all over. I didn't know who they were or what they
wanted, but the way I looked at it was that anything could happen in
those woods at that time of night, and, if anybody was coming along to
start something, he had got to reckon with me.

Somebody called, 'Peter! Are you there, Peter?'

There was a crashing in the bushes, the lights came nearer and nearer,
and then somebody said 'Here he is!' and there was a lot of shouting. I
stood where I was, ready to spring if necessary, for I was taking no
chances.

'Who are you?' I shouted. 'What do you want?' A light flashed in my
eyes.

'Why, it's that dog!'

Somebody came into the light, and I saw it was the boss. He was looking
very anxious and scared, and he scooped Peter up off the ground and
hugged him tight.

Peter was only half awake. He looked up at the boss drowsily, and began
to talk about brigands, and Dick and Ted and Alfred, the same as he had
said to me. There wasn't a sound till he had finished. Then the boss
spoke.

'Kidnappers! I thought as much. And the dog drove them away!'

For the first time in our acquaintance he actually patted me.

'Good old man!' he said.

'He's my dog,' said Peter sleepily, 'and he isn't to be shot.'

'He certainly isn't, my boy,' said the boss. 'From now on he's the
honoured guest. He shall wear a gold collar and order what he wants for
dinner. And now let's be getting home. It's time you were in bed.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Mother used to say, 'If you're a good dog, you will be happy. If you're
not, you won't,' but it seems to me that in this world it is all a
matter of luck. When I did everything I could to please people, they
wanted to shoot me; and when I did nothing except run away, they
brought me back and treated me better than the most valuable
prize-winner in the kennels. It was puzzling at first, but one day I
heard the boss talking to a friend who had come down from the city.

The friend looked at me and said, 'What an ugly mongrel! Why on earth
do you have him about? I thought you were so particular about your
dogs?'

And the boss replied, 'He may be a mongrel, but he can have anything he
wants in this house. Didn't you hear how he saved Peter from being
kidnapped?'

And out it all came about the brigands.

'The kid called them brigands,' said the boss. 'I suppose that's how it
would strike a child of that age. But he kept mentioning the name Dick,
and that put the police on the scent. It seems there's a kidnapper well
known to the police all over the country as Dick the Snatcher. It was
almost certainly that scoundrel and his gang. How they spirited the
child away, goodness knows, but they managed it, and the dog tracked
them and scared them off. We found him and Peter together in the woods.
It was a narrow escape, and we have to thank this animal here for it.'

What could I say? It was no more use trying to put them right than it
had been when I mistook Toto for a rat. Peter had gone to sleep that
night pretending about the brigands to pass the time, and when he awoke
he still believed in them. He was that sort of child. There was nothing
that I could do about it.

Round the corner, as the boss was speaking, I saw the kennel-man coming
with a plate in his hand. It smelt fine, and he was headed straight for
me.

He put the plate down before me. It was liver, which I love.

'Yes,' went on the boss, 'if it hadn't been for him, Peter would have
been kidnapped and scared half to death, and I should be poorer, I
suppose, by whatever the scoundrels had chosen to hold me up for.'

I am an honest dog, and hate to obtain credit under false pretences,
but--liver is liver. I let it go at that.




CROWNED HEADS


Katie had never been more surprised in her life than when the serious
young man with the brown eyes and the Charles Dana Gibson profile
spirited her away from his friend and Genevieve. Till that moment she
had looked on herself as playing a sort of 'villager and retainer' part
to the brown-eyed young man's hero and Genevieve's heroine. She knew
she was not pretty, though somebody (unidentified) had once said that
she had nice eyes; whereas Genevieve was notoriously a beauty,
incessantly pestered, so report had it, by musical comedy managers to
go on the stage.

Genevieve was tall and blonde, a destroyer of masculine peace of mind.
She said 'harf' and 'rahther', and might easily have been taken for an
English duchess instead of a cloak-model at Macey's. You would have
said, in short, that, in the matter of personable young men, Genevieve
would have swept the board. Yet, here was this one deliberately
selecting her, Katie, for his companion. It was almost a miracle.

He had managed it with the utmost dexterity at the merry-go-round. With
winning politeness he had assisted Genevieve on her wooden steed, and
then, as the machinery began to work, had grasped Katie's arm and led
her at a rapid walk out into the sunlight. Katie's last glimpse of
Genevieve had been the sight of her amazed and offended face as it
whizzed round the corner, while the steam melodeon drowned protests
with a spirited plunge into 'Alexander's Ragtime Band'.

Katie felt shy. This young man was a perfect stranger. It was true she
had had a formal introduction to him, but only from Genevieve, who had
scraped acquaintance with him exactly two minutes previously. It had
happened on the ferry-boat on the way to Palisades Park. Genevieve's
bright eye, roving among the throng on the lower deck, had singled out
this young man and his companion as suitable cavaliers for the
expedition. The young man pleased her, and his friend, with the broken
nose and the face like a good-natured bulldog, was obviously suitable
for Katie.

Etiquette is not rigid on New York ferry-boats. Without fuss or delay
she proceeded to make their acquaintance--to Katie's concern, for she
could never get used to Genevieve's short way with strangers. The quiet
life she had led had made her almost prudish, and there were times when
Genevieve's conduct shocked her. Of course, she knew there was no harm
in Genevieve. As the latter herself had once put it, 'The feller that
tries to get gay with me is going to get a call-down that'll make him
holler for his winter overcoat.' But all the same she could not
approve. And the net result of her disapproval was to make her shy and
silent as she walked by this young man's side.

The young man seemed to divine her thoughts.

'Say, I'm on the level,' he observed. 'You want to get that. Right on
the square. See?'

'Oh, yes,' said Katie, relieved but yet embarrassed. It was awkward to
have one's thoughts read like this.

'You ain't like your friend. Don't think I don't see that.'

'Genevieve's a sweet girl,' said Katie, loyally.

'A darned sight too sweet. Somebody ought to tell her mother.'

'Why did you speak to her if you did not like her?'

'Wanted to get to know you,' said the young man simply.

They walked on in silence. Katie's heart was beating with a rapidity
that forbade speech. Nothing like this very direct young man had ever
happened to her before. She had grown so accustomed to regarding
herself as something too insignificant and unattractive for the notice
of the lordly male that she was overwhelmed. She had a vague feeling
that there was a mistake somewhere. It surely could not be she who was
proving so alluring to this fairy prince. The novelty of the situation
frightened her.

'Come here often?' asked her companion.

'I've never been here before.'

'Often go to Coney?'

'I've never been.'

He regarded her with astonishment.

'You've never been to Coney Island! Why, you don't know what this sort
of thing is till you've taken in Coney. This place isn't on the map
with Coney. Do you mean to say you've never seen Luna Park, or
Dreamland, or Steeplechase, or the diving ducks? Haven't you had a look
at the Mardi Gras stunts? Why, Coney during Mardi Gras is the greatest
thing on earth. It's a knockout. Just about a million boys and girls
having the best time that ever was. Say, I guess you don't go out much,
do you?'

'Not much.'

'If it's not a rude question, what do you do? I been trying to place you
all along. Now I reckon your friend works in a store, don't she?'

'Yes. She's a cloak-model. She has a lovely figure, hasn't she?'

'Didn't notice it. I guess so, if she's what you say. It's what they
pay her for, ain't it? Do you work in a store, too?'

'Not exactly. I keep a little shop.'

'All by yourself?'

'I do all the work now. It was my father's shop, but he's dead. It
began by being my grandfather's. He started it. But he's so old now
that, of course, he can't work any longer, so I look after things.'

'Say, you're a wonder! What sort of a shop?'

'It's only a little second-hand bookshop. There really isn't much to
do.'

'Where is it?'

'Sixth Avenue. Near Washington Square.'

'What name?'

'Bennett.'

'That's your name, then?'

'Yes.'

'Anything besides Bennett?'

'My name's Kate.'

The young man nodded.

'I'd make a pretty good district attorney,' he said, disarming possible
resentment at this cross-examination. 'I guess you're wondering if I'm
ever going to stop asking you questions. Well, what would you like to
do?'

'Don't you think we ought to go back and find your friend and
Genevieve? They will be wondering where we are.'

'Let 'em,' said the young man briefly. 'I've had all I want of Jenny.'

'I can't understand why you don't like her.'

'I like you. Shall we have some ice-cream, or would you rather go on
the Scenic Railway?'

Katie decided on the more peaceful pleasure. They resumed their walk,
socially licking two cones. Out of the corner of her eyes Katie cast
swift glances at her friend's face. He was a very grave young man.
There was something important as well as handsome about him. Once, as
they made their way through the crowds, she saw a couple of boys look
almost reverently at him. She wondered who he could be, but was too shy
to inquire. She had got over her nervousness to a great extent, but
there were still limits to what she felt herself equal to saying. It
did not strike her that it was only fair that she should ask a few
questions in return for those which he had put. She had always
repressed herself, and she did so now. She was content to be with him
without finding out his name and history.

He supplied the former just before he finally consented to let her go.

They were standing looking over the river. The sun had spent its force,
and it was cool and pleasant in the breeze which was coming up the
Hudson. Katie was conscious of a vague feeling that was almost
melancholy. It had been a lovely afternoon, and she was sorry that it
was over.

The young man shuffled his feet on the loose stones.

'I'm mighty glad I met you,' he said. 'Say, I'm coming to see you. On
Sixth Avenue. Don't mind, do you?'

He did not wait for a reply.

'Brady's my name. Ted Brady, Glencoe Athletic Club,' he paused. 'I'm on
the level,' he added, and paused again. 'I like you a whole lot. There's
your friend, Genevieve. Better go after her, hadn't you? Good-bye.' And
he was gone, walking swiftly through the crowd about the bandstand.

Katie went back to Genevieve, and Genevieve was simply horrid. Cold and
haughty, a beautiful iceberg of dudgeon, she refused to speak a single
word during the whole long journey back to Sixth Avenue. And Katie,
whose tender heart would at other times have been tortured by this
hostility, leant back in her seat, and was happy. Her mind was far away
from Genevieve's frozen gloom, living over again the wonderful
happenings of the afternoon.

Yes, it had been a wonderful afternoon, but trouble was waiting for her
in Sixth Avenue. Trouble was never absent for very long from Katie's
unselfish life. Arriving at the little bookshop, she found Mr Murdoch,
the glazier, preparing for departure. Mr Murdoch came in on Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays to play draughts with her grandfather, who was
paralysed from the waist, and unable to leave the house except when
Katie took him for his outing in Washington Square each morning in his
bath-chair.

Mr Murdoch welcomed Katie with joy.

'I was wondering whenever you would come back, Katie. I'm afraid the
old man's a little upset.'

'Not ill?'

'Not ill. Upset. And it was my fault, too. Thinking he'd be interested,
I read him a piece from the paper where I seen about these English
Suffragettes, and he just went up in the air. I guess he'll be all
right now you've come back. I was a fool to read it, I reckon. I kind
of forgot for the moment.'

'Please don't worry yourself about it, Mr Murdoch. He'll be all right
soon. I'll go to him.'

In the inner room the old man was sitting. His face was flushed, and he
gesticulated from time to time.

'I won't have it,' he cried as Katie entered. 'I tell you I won't have
it. If Parliament can't do anything, I'll send Parliament about its
business.'

'Here I am, grandpapa,' said Katie quickly. 'I've had the greatest
time. It was lovely up there. I--'

'I tell you it's got to stop. I've spoken about it before. I won't have
it.'

'I expect they're doing their best. It's your being so far away that
makes it hard for them. But I do think you might write them a very
sharp letter.'

'I will. I will. Get out the paper. Are you ready?' He stopped, and
looked piteously at Katie. 'I don't know what to say. I don't know how
to begin.'

Katie scribbled a few lines.

'How would this do? "His Majesty informs his Government that he is
greatly surprised and indignant that no notice has been taken of his
previous communications. If this goes on, he will be reluctantly
compelled to put the matter in other hands."'

She read it glibly as she had written it. The formula had been a
favourite one of her late father, when roused to fall upon offending
patrons of the bookshop.

The old man beamed. His resentment was gone. He was soothed and happy.

'That'll wake 'em up,' he said. 'I won't have these goings on while I'm
king, and if they don't like it, they know what to do. You're a good
girl, Katie.'

He chuckled.

'I beat Lord Murdoch five games to nothing,' he said.

It was now nearly two years since the morning when old Matthew Bennett
had announced to an audience consisting of Katie and a smoky blue cat,
which had wandered in from Washington Square to take pot-luck, that he
was the King of England.

This was a long time for any one delusion of the old man's to last.
Usually they came and went with a rapidity which made it hard for
Katie, for all her tact, to keep abreast of them. She was not likely to
forget the time when he went to bed President Roosevelt and woke up the
Prophet Elijah. It was the only occasion in all the years they had
passed together when she had felt like giving way and indulging in the
fit of hysterics which most girls of her age would have had as a matter
of course.

She had handled that crisis, and she handled the present one with equal
smoothness. When her grandfather made his announcement, which he did
rather as one stating a generally recognized fact than as if the
information were in any way sensational, she neither screamed nor
swooned, nor did she rush to the neighbours for advice. She merely gave
the old man his breakfast, not forgetting to set aside a suitable
portion for the smoky cat, and then went round to notify Mr Murdoch of
what had happened.

Mr Murdoch, excellent man, received the news without any fuss or
excitement at all, and promised to look in on Schwartz, the stout
saloon-keeper, who was Mr Bennett's companion and antagonist at
draughts on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, and, as he expressed
it, put him wise.

Life ran comfortably in the new groove. Old Mr Bennett continued to
play draughts and pore over his second-hand classics. Every morning he
took his outing in Washington Square where, from his invalid's chair,
he surveyed somnolent Italians and roller-skating children with his old
air of kindly approval. Katie, whom circumstances had taught to be
thankful for small mercies, was perfectly happy in the shadow of the
throne. She liked her work; she liked looking after her grandfather;
and now that Ted Brady had come into her life, she really began to look
on herself as an exceptionally lucky girl, a spoilt favourite of
Fortune.

For Ted Brady had called, as he said he would, and from the very first
he had made plain in his grave, direct way the objects of his visits.
There was no subtlety about Ted, no finesse. He was as frank as a
music-hall love song.

On his first visit, having handed Katie a large bunch of roses with the
stolidity of a messenger boy handing over a parcel, he had proceeded,
by way of establishing his _bona fides_, to tell her all about
himself. He supplied the facts in no settled order, just as they
happened to occur to him in the long silences with which his speech was
punctuated. Small facts jostled large facts. He spoke of his morals and
his fox-terrier in the same breath.

'I'm on the level. Ask anyone who knows me. They'll tell you that. Say,
I got the cutest little dog you ever seen. Do you like dogs? I've never
been a fellow that's got himself mixed up with girls. I don't like 'em
as a general thing. A fellow's got too much to do keeping himself in
training, if his club expects him to do things. I belong to the Glencoe
Athletic. I ran the hundred yards dash in evens last sports there was.
They expect me to do it at the Glencoe, so I've never got myself mixed
up with girls. Till I seen you that afternoon I reckon I'd hardly
looked at a girl, honest. They didn't seem to kind of make any hit with
me. And then I seen you, and I says to myself, "That's the one." It
sort of came over me in a flash. I fell for you directly I seen you.
And I'm on the level. Don't forget that.'

And more in the same strain, leaning on the counter and looking into
Katie's eyes with a devotion that added emphasis to his measured
speech.

Next day he came again, and kissed her respectfully but firmly, making
a sort of shuffling dive across the counter. Breaking away, he fumbled
in his pocket and produced a ring, which he proceeded to place on her
finger with the serious air which accompanied all his actions.

'That looks pretty good to me,' he said, as he stepped back and eyed
it.

It struck Katie, when he had gone, how differently different men did
things. Genevieve had often related stories of men who had proposed to
her, and according to Genevieve, they always got excited and emotional,
and sometimes cried. Ted Brady had fitted her with the ring more like a
glover's assistant than anything else, and he had hardly spoken a word
from beginning to end. He had seemed to take her acquiescence for
granted. And yet there had been nothing flat or disappointing about the
proceedings. She had been thrilled throughout. It is to be supposed
that Mr Brady had the force of character which does not require the aid
of speech.

It was not till she took the news of her engagement to old Mr Bennett
that it was borne in upon Katie that Fate did not intend to be so
wholly benevolent to her as she supposed.

That her grandfather could offer any opposition had not occurred to her
as a possibility. She took his approval for granted. Never, as long as
she could remember, had he been anything but kind to her. And the only
possible objections to marriage from a grandfather's point of
view--badness of character, insufficient means, or inferiority of
social position--were in this case gloriously absent.

She could not see how anyone, however hypercritical, could find a flaw
in Ted. His character was spotless. He was comfortably off. And so far
from being in any way inferior socially, it was he who condescended.
For Ted, she had discovered from conversation with Mr Murdoch, the
glazier, was no ordinary young man. He was a celebrity. So much so that
for a moment, when told the news of the engagement, Mr Murdoch,
startled out of his usual tact, had exhibited frank surprise that the
great Ted Brady should not have aimed higher.

'You're sure you've got the name right, Katie?' he had said. 'It's
really Ted Brady? No mistake about the first name? Well-built,
good-looking young chap with brown eyes? Well, this beats me. Not,' he
went on hurriedly, 'that any young fellow mightn't think himself lucky
to get a wife like you, Katie, but Ted Brady! Why, there isn't a girl
in this part of the town, or in Harlem or the Bronx, for that matter,
who wouldn't give her eyes to be in your place. Why, Ted Brady is the
big noise. He's the star of the Glencoe.'

'He told me he belonged to the Glencoe Athletic.'

'Don't you believe it. It belongs to him. Why, the way that boy runs
and jumps is the real limit. There's only Billy Burton, of the
Irish-American, that can touch him. You've certainly got the pick of
the bunch, Katie.'

He stared at her admiringly, as if for the first time realizing her
true worth. For Mr Murdoch was a great patron of sport.

With these facts in her possession Katie had approached the interview
with her grandfather with a good deal of confidence.

The old man listened to her recital of Mr Brady's qualities in silence.
Then he shook his head.

'It can't be, Katie. I couldn't have it.'

'Grandpapa!'

'You're forgetting, my dear.'

'Forgetting?'

'Who ever heard of such a thing? The grand-daughter of the King of
England marrying a commoner! It wouldn't do at all.'

Consternation, surprise, and misery kept Katie dumb. She had learned in
a hard school to be prepared for sudden blows from the hand of fate,
but this one was so entirely unforeseen that it found her unprepared,
and she was crushed by it. She knew her grandfather's obstinacy too
well to argue against the decision.

'Oh, no, not at all,' he repeated. 'Oh, no, it wouldn't do.'

Katie said nothing; she was beyond speech. She stood there wide-eyed
and silent among the ruins of her little air-castle. The old man patted
her hand affectionately. He was pleased at her docility. It was the
right attitude, becoming in one of her high rank.

'I am very sorry, my dear, but--oh, no! oh, no! oh, no--' His voice
trailed away into an unintelligible mutter. He was a very old man, and
he was not always able to concentrate his thoughts on a subject for any
length of time.

So little did Ted Brady realize at first the true complexity of the
situation that he was inclined, when he heard of the news, to treat the
crisis in the jaunty, dashing, love-laughs-at-locksmith fashion so
popular with young men of spirit when thwarted in their loves by the
interference of parents and guardians.

It took Katie some time to convince him that, just because he had the
licence in his pocket, he could not snatch her up on his saddle-bow and
carry her off to the nearest clergyman after the manner of young
Lochinvar.

In the first flush of his resentment at restraint he saw no reason why
he should differentiate between old Mr Bennett and the conventional
banns-forbidding father of the novelettes with which he was accustomed
to sweeten his hours of idleness. To him, till Katie explained the
intricacies of the position, Mr Bennett was simply the proud
millionaire who would not hear of his daughter marrying the artist.

'But, Ted, dear, you don't understand,' Katie said. 'We simply couldn't
do that. There's no one but me to look after him, poor old man. How
could I run away like that and get married? What would become of him?'

'You wouldn't be away long,' urged Mr Brady, a man of many parts, but
not a rapid thinker. 'The minister would have us fixed up inside of
half an hour. Then we'd look in at Mouquin's for a steak and fried,
just to make a sort of wedding breakfast. And then back we'd come,
hand-in-hand, and say, "Well, here we are. Now what?"'

'He would never forgive me.'

'That,' said Ted judicially, 'would be up to him.'

'It would kill him. Don't you see, we know that it's all nonsense, this
idea of his; but he really thinks he is the king, and he's so old that
the shock of my disobeying him would be too much. Honest, Ted, dear, I
couldn't.'

Gloom unutterable darkened Ted Brady's always serious countenance. The
difficulties of the situation were beginning to come home to him.

'Maybe if I went and saw him--' he suggested at last.

'You _could_,' said Katie doubtfully.

Ted tightened his belt with an air of determination, and bit resolutely
on the chewing-gum which was his inseparable companion.

'I will,' he said.

'You'll be nice to him, Ted?'

He nodded. He was the man of action, not words.

It was perhaps ten minutes before he came out of the inner room in
which Mr Bennett passed his days. When he did, there was no light of
jubilation on his face. His brow was darker than ever.

Katie looked at him anxiously. He returned the look with a sombre shake
of the head.

'Nothing doing,' he said shortly. He paused. 'Unless,' he added, 'you
count it anything that he's made me an earl.'

In the next two weeks several brains busied themselves with the
situation. Genevieve, reconciled to Katie after a decent interval of
wounded dignity, said she supposed there was a way out, if one could
only think of it, but it certainly got past her. The only approach to a
plan of action was suggested by the broken-nosed individual who had
been Ted's companion that day at Palisades Park, a gentleman of some
eminence in the boxing world, who rejoiced in the name of the Tennessee
Bear-Cat.

What they ought to do, in the Bear-Cat's opinion, was to get the old
man out into Washington Square one morning. He of Tennessee would then
sasshay up in a flip manner and make a break. Ted, waiting close by,
would resent his insolence. There would be words, followed by blows.

'See what I mean?' pursued the Bear-Cat. 'There's you and me mixing it.
I'll square the cop on the beat to leave us be; he's a friend of mine.
Pretty soon you land me one on the plexus, and I take th' count. Then
there's you hauling me up by th' collar to the old gentleman, and me
saying I quits and apologizing. See what I mean?'

The whole, presumably, to conclude with warm expressions of gratitude
and esteem from Mr Bennett, and an instant withdrawal of the veto.

Ted himself approved of the scheme. He said it was a cracker-jaw, and
he wondered how one so notoriously ivory-skulled as the other could
have had such an idea. The Bear-Cat said modestly that he had 'em
sometimes. And it is probable that all would have been well, had it not
been necessary to tell the plan to Katie, who was horrified at the very
idea, spoke warmly of the danger to her grandfather's nervous system,
and said she did not think the Bear-Cat could be a nice friend for Ted.
And matters relapsed into their old state of hopelessness.

And then, one day, Katie forced herself to tell Ted that she thought it
would be better if they did not see each other for a time. She said
that these meetings were only a source of pain to both of them. It
would really be better if he did not come round for--well, quite some
time.

It had not been easy for her to say it. The decision was the outcome of
many wakeful nights. She had asked herself the question whether it was
fair for her to keep Ted chained to her in this hopeless fashion, when,
left to himself and away from her, he might so easily find some other
girl to make him happy.

So Ted went, reluctantly, and the little shop on Sixth Avenue knew him
no more. And Katie spent her time looking after old Mr Bennett (who had
completely forgotten the affair by now, and sometimes wondered why
Katie was not so cheerful as she had been), and--for, though unselfish,
she was human--hating those unknown girls whom in her mind's eye she
could see clustering round Ted, smiling at him, making much of him, and
driving the bare recollection of her out of his mind.

The summer passed. July came and went, making New York an oven. August
followed, and one wondered why one had complained of July's tepid
advances.

It was on the evening of September the eleventh that Katie, having
closed the little shop, sat in the dusk on the steps, as many thousands
of her fellow-townsmen and townswomen were doing, turning her face to
the first breeze which New York had known for two months. The hot spell
had broken abruptly that afternoon, and the city was drinking in the
coolness as a flower drinks water.

From round the corner, where the yellow cross of the Judson Hotel shone
down on Washington Square, came the shouts of children, and the
strains, mellowed by distance, of the indefatigable barrel-organ which
had played the same tunes in the same place since the spring.

Katie closed her eyes, and listened. It was very peaceful this evening,
so peaceful that for an instant she forgot even to think of Ted. And it
was just during this instant that she heard his voice.

'That you, kid?'

He was standing before her, his hands in his pockets, one foot on the
pavement, the other in the road; and if he was agitated, his voice did
not show it.

'Ted!'

'That's me. Can I see the old man for a minute, Katie?'

This time it did seem to her that she could detect a slight ring of
excitement.

'It's no use, Ted. Honest.'

'No harm in going in and passing the time of day, is there? I've got
something I want to say to him.'

'What?'

'Tell you later, maybe. Is he in his room?'

He stepped past her, and went in. As he went, he caught her arm and
pressed it, but he did not stop. She saw him go into the inner room and
heard through the door as he closed it behind him, the murmur of
voices. And almost immediately, it seemed to her, her name was called.
It was her grandfather's voice which called, high and excited. The door
opened, and Ted appeared.

'Come here a minute, Katie, will you?' he said. 'You're wanted.'

The old man was leaning forward in his chair. He was in a state of
extraordinary excitement. He quivered and jumped. Ted, standing by the
wall, looked as stolid as ever; but his eyes glittered.

'Katie,' cried the old man, 'this is a most remarkable piece of news.
This gentleman has just been telling me--extraordinary. He--'

He broke off, and looked at Ted, as he had looked at Katie when he had
tried to write the letter to the Parliament of England.

Ted's eye, as it met Katie's, was almost defiant.

'I want to marry you,' he said.

'Yes, yes,' broke in Mr Bennett, impatiently, 'but--'

'And I'm a king.'

'Yes, yes, that's it, that's it, Katie. This gentleman is a king.'

Once more Ted's eye met Katie's, and this time there was an imploring
look in it.

'That's right,' he said, slowly. 'I've just been telling your
grandfather I'm the King of Coney Island.'

'That's it. Of Coney Island.'

'So there's no objection now to us getting married, kid--Your Royal
Highness. It's a royal alliance, see?'

'A royal alliance,' echoed Mr Bennett.

Out in the street, Ted held Katie's hand, and grinned a little
sheepishly.

'You're mighty quiet, kid,' he said. 'It looks as if it don't make much
of a hit with you, the notion of being married to me.'

'Oh, Ted! But--'

He squeezed her hand.

'I know what you're thinking. I guess it was raw work pulling a tale
like that on the old man. I hated to do it, but gee! when a fellow's up
against it like I was, he's apt to grab most any chance that comes
along. Why, say, kid, it kind of looked to me as if it was sort of
_meant_. Coming just now, like it did, just when it was wanted,
and just when it didn't seem possible it could happen. Why, a week ago
I was nigh on two hundred votes behind Billy Burton. The Irish-American
put him up, and everybody thought he'd be King at the Mardi Gras. And
then suddenly they came pouring in for me, till at the finish I had
Billy looking like a regular has-been.

'It's funny the way the voting jumps about every year in this Coney
election. It was just Providence, and it didn't seem right to let it go
by. So I went in to the old man, and told him. Say, I tell you I was
just sweating when I got ready to hand it to him. It was an outside
chance he'd remember all about what the Mardi Gras at Coney was, and
just what being a king at it amounted to. Then I remembered you telling
me you'd never been to Coney, so I figured your grandfather wouldn't be
what you'd call well fixed in his information about it, so I took the
chance.

'I tried him out first. I tried him with Brooklyn. Why, say, from the
way he took it, he'd either never heard of the place, or else he'd
forgotten what it was. I guess he don't remember much, poor old fellow.
Then I mentioned Yonkers. He asked me what Yonkers were. Then I
reckoned it was safe to bring on Coney, and he fell for it right away.
I felt mean, but it had to be done.'

He caught her up, and swung her into the air with a perfectly impassive
face. Then, having kissed her, he lowered her gently to the ground
again. The action seemed to have relieved his feelings, for when he
spoke again it was plain that his conscience no longer troubled him.

'And say,' he said, 'come to think of it, I don't see where there's so
much call for me to feel mean. I'm not so far short of being a regular
king. Coney's just as big as some of those kingdoms you read about on
the other side; and, from what you see in the papers about the
goings-on there, it looks to me that, having a whole week on the throne
like I'm going to have, amounts to a pretty steady job as kings go.'




AT GEISENHEIMER'S


As I walked to Geisenheimer's that night I was feeling blue and
restless, tired of New York, tired of dancing, tired of everything.
Broadway was full of people hurrying to the theatres. Cars rattled by.
All the electric lights in the world were blazing down on the Great
White Way. And it all seemed stale and dreary to me.

Geisenheimer's was full as usual. All the tables were occupied, and
there were several couples already on the dancing-floor in the centre.
The band was playing 'Michigan':

     _I want to go back, I want to go back
     To the place where I was born.
     Far away from harm
     With a milk-pail on my arm._

I suppose the fellow who wrote that would have called for the police if
anyone had ever really tried to get him on to a farm, but he has
certainly put something into the tune which makes you think he meant
what he said. It's a homesick tune, that.

I was just looking round for an empty table, when a man jumped up and
came towards me, registering joy as if I had been his long-lost sister.

He was from the country. I could see that. It was written all over him,
from his face to his shoes.

He came up with his hand out, beaming.

'Why, Miss Roxborough!'

'Why not?' I said.

'Don't you remember me?'

I didn't.

'My name is Ferris.'

'It's a nice name, but it means nothing in my young life.'

'I was introduced to you last time I came here. We danced together.'

This seemed to bear the stamp of truth. If he was introduced to me, he
probably danced with me. It's what I'm at Geisenheimer's for.

'When was it?'

'A year ago last April.'

You can't beat these rural charmers. They think New York is folded up
and put away in camphor when they leave, and only taken out again when
they pay their next visit. The notion that anything could possibly have
happened since he was last in our midst to blur the memory of that
happy evening had not occurred to Mr Ferris. I suppose he was so
accustomed to dating things from 'when I was in New York' that he
thought everybody else must do the same.

'Why, sure, I remember you,' I said. 'Algernon Clarence, isn't it?'

'Not Algernon Clarence. My name's Charlie.'

'My mistake. And what's the great scheme, Mr Ferris? Do you want to
dance with me again?'

He did. So we started. Mine not to reason why, mine but to do and die,
as the poem says. If an elephant had come into Geisenheimer's and asked
me to dance I'd have had to do it. And I'm not saying that Mr Ferris
wasn't the next thing to it. He was one of those earnest, persevering
dancers--the kind that have taken twelve correspondence lessons.

I guess I was about due that night to meet someone from the country.
There still come days in the spring when the country seems to get a
stranglehold on me and start in pulling. This particular day had been
one of them. I got up in the morning and looked out of the window, and
the breeze just wrapped me round and began whispering about pigs and
chickens. And when I went out on Fifth Avenue there seemed to be
flowers everywhere. I headed for the Park, and there was the grass all
green, and the trees coming out, and a sort of something in the
air--why, say, if there hadn't have been a big policeman keeping an eye
on me, I'd have flung myself down and bitten chunks out of the turf.

And as soon as I got to Geisenheimer's they played that 'Michigan'
thing.

Why, Charlie from Squeedunk's 'entrance' couldn't have been better
worked up if he'd been a star in a Broadway show. The stage was just
waiting for him.

But somebody's always taking the joy out of life. I ought to have
remembered that the most metropolitan thing in the metropolis is a
rustic who's putting in a week there. We weren't thinking on the same
plane, Charlie and me. The way I had been feeling all day, what I
wanted to talk about was last season's crops. The subject he fancied
was this season's chorus-girls. Our souls didn't touch by a mile and a
half.

'This is the life!' he said.

There's always a point when that sort of man says that.

'I suppose you come here quite a lot?' he said.

'Pretty often.'

I didn't tell him that I came there every night, and that I came
because I was paid for it. If you're a professional dancer at
Geisenheimer's, you aren't supposed to advertise the fact. The
management thinks that if you did it might send the public away
thinking too hard when they saw you win the Great Contest for the
Love-r-ly Silver Cup which they offer later in the evening. Say, that
Love-r-ly Cup's a joke. I win it on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays,
and Mabel Francis wins it on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. It's
all perfectly fair and square, of course. It's purely a matter of merit
who wins the Love-r-ly Cup. Anybody could win it. Only somehow they
don't. And the coincidence of the fact that Mabel and I always do has
kind of got on the management's nerves, and they don't like us to tell
people we're employed there. They prefer us to blush unseen.

'It's a great place,' said Mr Ferris, 'and New York's a great place.
I'd like to live in New York.'

'The loss is ours. Why don't you?'

'Some city! But dad's dead now, and I've got the drugstore, you know.'

He spoke as if I ought to remember reading about it in the papers.

'And I'm making good with it, what's more. I've got push and ideas.
Say, I got married since I saw you last.'

'You did, did you?' I said. 'Then what are you doing, may I ask,
dancing on Broadway like a gay bachelor? I suppose you have left your
wife at Hicks' Corners, singing "Where is my wandering boy tonight"?'

'Not Hicks' Corners. Ashley, Maine. That's where I live. My wife comes
from Rodney.... Pardon me, I'm afraid I stepped on your foot.'

'My fault,' I said; 'I lost step. Well, I wonder you aren't ashamed
even to think of your wife, when you've left her all alone out there
while you come whooping it up in New York. Haven't you got any
conscience?'

'But I haven't left her. She's here.'

'In New York?'

'In this restaurant. That's her up there.'

I looked up at the balcony. There was a face hanging over the red plush
rail. It looked to me as if it had some hidden sorrow. I'd noticed it
before, when we were dancing around, and I had wondered what the
trouble was. Now I began to see.

'Why aren't you dancing with her and giving her a good time, then?' I
said.

'Oh, she's having a good time.'

'She doesn't look it. She looks as if she would like to be down here,
treading the measure.'

'She doesn't dance much.'

'Don't you have dances at Ashley?'

'It's different at home. She dances well enough for Ashley, but--well,
this isn't Ashley.'

'I see. But you're not like that?'

He gave a kind of smirk.

'Oh, I've been in New York before.'

I could have bitten him, the sawn-off little rube! It made me mad. He
was ashamed to dance in public with his wife--didn't think her good
enough for him. So he had dumped her in a chair, given her a lemonade,
and told her to be good, and then gone off to have a good time. They
could have had me arrested for what I was thinking just then.

The band began to play something else.

'This is the life!' said Mr Ferris. 'Let's do it again.'

'Let somebody else do it,' I said. 'I'm tired. I'll introduce you to
some friends of mine.'

So I took him off, and whisked him on to some girls I knew at one of
the tables.

'Shake hands with my friend Mr Ferris,' I said. 'He wants to show you
the latest steps. He does most of them on your feet.'

I could have betted on Charlie, the Debonair Pride of Ashley. Guess
what he said? He said, 'This is the life!'

And I left him, and went up to the balcony.

She was leaning with her elbows on the red plush, looking down on the
dancing-floor. They had just started another tune, and hubby was moving
around with one of the girls I'd introduced him to. She didn't have to
prove to me that she came from the country. I knew it. She was a little
bit of a thing, old-fashioned looking. She was dressed in grey, with
white muslin collar and cuffs, and her hair done simple. She had a
black hat.

I kind of hovered for awhile. It isn't the best thing I do, being shy;
as a general thing I'm more or less there with the nerve; but somehow I
sort of hesitated to charge in.

Then I braced up, and made for the vacant chair.

'I'll sit here, if you don't mind,' I said.

She turned in a startled way. I could see she was wondering who I was,
and what right I had there, but wasn't certain whether it might not be
city etiquette for strangers to come and dump themselves down and start
chatting. 'I've just been dancing with your husband,' I said, to ease
things along.

'I saw you.'

She fixed me with a pair of big brown eyes. I took one look at them,
and then I had to tell myself that it might be pleasant, and a relief
to my feelings, to take something solid and heavy and drop it over the
rail on to hubby, but the management wouldn't like it. That was how I
felt about him just then. The poor kid was doing everything with those
eyes except crying. She looked like a dog that's been kicked.

She looked away, and fiddled with the string of the electric light.
There was a hatpin lying on the table. She picked it up, and began to
dig at the red plush.

'Ah, come on sis,' I said; 'tell me all about it.'

'I don't know what you mean.'

'You can't fool me. Tell me your troubles.'

'I don't know you.'

'You don't have to know a person to tell her your troubles. I sometimes
tell mine to the cat that camps out on the wall opposite my room. What
did you want to leave the country for, with summer coming on?'

She didn't answer, but I could see it coming, so I sat still and
waited. And presently she seemed to make up her mind that, even if it
was no business of mine, it would be a relief to talk about it.

'We're on our honeymoon. Charlie wanted to come to New York. I didn't
want to, but he was set on it. He's been here before.'

'So he told me.'

'He's wild about New York.'

'But you're not.'

'I hate it.'

'Why?'

She dug away at the red plush with the hatpin, picking out little bits
and dropping them over the edge. I could see she was bracing herself to
put me wise to the whole trouble. There's a time comes when things
aren't going right, and you've had all you can stand, when you have got
to tell somebody about it, no matter who it is.

'I hate New York,' she said getting it out at last with a rush. 'I'm
scared of it. It--it isn't fair Charlie bringing me here. I didn't want
to come. I knew what would happen. I felt it all along.'

'What do you think will happen, then?'

She must have picked away at least an inch of the red plush before she
answered. It's lucky Jimmy, the balcony waiter, didn't see her; it
would have broken his heart; he's as proud of that red plush as if he
had paid for it himself.

'When I first went to live at Rodney,' she said, 'two years ago--we
moved there from Illinois--there was a man there named Tyson--Jack
Tyson. He lived all alone and didn't seem to want to know anyone. I
couldn't understand it till somebody told me all about him. I can
understand it now. Jack Tyson married a Rodney girl, and they came to
New York for their honeymoon, just like us. And when they got there I
guess she got to comparing him with the fellows she saw, and comparing
the city with Rodney, and when she got home she just couldn't settle
down.'

'Well?'

'After they had been back in Rodney for a little while she ran away.
Back to the city, I guess.'

'I suppose he got a divorce?'

'No, he didn't. He still thinks she may come back to him.'

'He still thinks she will come back?' I said. 'After she has been away
three years!'

'Yes. He keeps her things just the same as she left them when she went
away, everything just the same.'

'But isn't he angry with her for what she did? If I was a man and a
girl treated me that way, I'd be apt to murder her if she tried to show
up again.'

'He wouldn't. Nor would I, if--if anything like that happened to me;
I'd wait and wait, and go on hoping all the time. And I'd go down to
the station to meet the train every afternoon, just like Jack Tyson.'

Something splashed on the tablecloth. It made me jump.

'For goodness' sake,' I said, 'what's your trouble? Brace up. I know
it's a sad story, but it's not your funeral.'

'It is. It is. The same thing's going to happen to me.'

'Take a hold on yourself. Don't cry like that.'

'I can't help it. Oh! I knew it would happen. It's happening right now.
Look--look at him.'

I glanced over the rail, and I saw what she meant. There was her
Charlie, dancing about all over the floor as if he had just discovered
that he hadn't lived till then. I saw him say something to the girl he
was dancing with. I wasn't near enough to hear it, but I bet it was
'This is the life!' If I had been his wife, in the same position as
this kid, I guess I'd have felt as bad as she did, for if ever a man
exhibited all the symptoms of incurable Newyorkitis, it was this
Charlie Ferris.

'I'm not like these New York girls,' she choked. 'I can't be smart. I
don't want to be. I just want to live at home and be happy. I knew it
would happen if we came to the city. He doesn't think me good enough
for him. He looks down on me.'

'Pull yourself together.'

'And I do love him so!'

Goodness knows what I should have said if I could have thought of
anything to say. But just then the music stopped, and somebody on the
floor below began to speak.

'Ladeez 'n' gemmen,' he said, 'there will now take place our great
Numbah Contest. This gen-u-ine sporting contest--'

It was Izzy Baermann making his nightly speech, introducing the
Love-r-ly Cup; and it meant that, for me, duty called. From where I sat
I could see Izzy looking about the room, and I knew he was looking for
me. It's the management's nightmare that one of these evenings Mabel or
I won't show up, and somebody else will get away with the Love-r-ly
Cup.

'Sorry I've got to go,' I said. 'I have to be in this.'

And then suddenly I had the great idea. It came to me like a flash, I
looked at her, crying there, and I looked over the rail at Charlie the
Boy Wonder, and I knew that this was where I got a stranglehold on my
place in the Hall of Fame, along with the great thinkers of the age.

'Come on,' I said. 'Come along. Stop crying and powder your nose and
get a move on. You're going to dance this.'

'But Charlie doesn't want to dance with me.'

'It may have escaped your notice,' I said, 'but your Charlie is not the
only man in New York, or even in this restaurant. I'm going to dance
with Charlie myself, and I'll introduce you to someone who can go
through the movements. Listen!'

'The lady of each couple'--this was Izzy, getting it off his
diaphragm--'will receive a ticket containing a num-bah. The dance will
then proceed, and the num-bahs will be eliminated one by one, those
called out by the judge kindly returning to their seats as their
num-bah is called. The num-bah finally remaining is the winning
num-bah. The contest is a genuine sporting contest, decided purely by
the skill of the holders of the various num-bahs.' (Izzy stopped
blushing at the age of six.) 'Will ladies now kindly step forward and
receive their num-bahs. The winner, the holder of the num-bah left on
the floor when the other num-bahs have been eliminated' (I could see
Izzy getting more and more uneasy, wondering where on earth I'd got
to), 'will receive this Love-r-ly Silver Cup, presented by the
management. Ladies will now kindly step forward and receive their
num-bahs.'

I turned to Mrs Charlie. 'There,' I said, 'don't you want to win a
Love-r-ly Silver Cup?'

'But I couldn't.'

'You never know your luck.'

'But it isn't luck. Didn't you hear him say it's a contest decided
purely by skill?'

'Well, try your skill, then.' I felt as if I could have shaken her.
'For goodness' sake,' I said, 'show a little grit. Aren't you going to
stir a finger to keep your Charlie? Suppose you win, think what it will
mean. He will look up to you for the rest of your life. When he starts
talking about New York, all you will have to say is, "New York? Ah,
yes, that was the town I won that Love-r-ly Silver Cup in, was it not?"
and he'll drop as if you had hit him behind the ear with a sandbag.
Pull yourself together and try.'

I saw those brown eyes of hers flash, and she said, 'I'll try.'

'Good for you,' I said. 'Now you get those tears dried, and fix
yourself up, and I'll go down and get the tickets.'

Izzy was mighty relieved when I bore down on him.

'Gee!' he said, 'I thought you had run away, or was sick or something.
Here's your ticket.'

'I want two, Izzy. One's for a friend of mine. And I say, Izzy, I'd
take it as a personal favour if you would let her stop on the floor as
one of the last two couples. There's a reason. She's a kid from the
country, and she wants to make a hit.'

'Sure, that'll be all right. Here are the tickets. Yours is thirty-six,
hers is ten.' He lowered his voice. 'Don't go mixing them.'

I went back to the balcony. On the way I got hold of Charlie.

'We're dancing this together,' I said.

He grinned all across his face.

I found Mrs Charlie looking as if she had never shed a tear in her
life. She certainly had pluck, that kid.

'Come on,' I said. 'Stick to your ticket like wax and watch your step.'

I guess you've seen these sporting contests at Geisenheimer's. Or, if
you haven't seen them at Geisenheimer's, you've seen them somewhere
else. They're all the same.

When we began, the floor was so crowded that there was hardly
elbow-room. Don't tell me there aren't any optimists nowadays. Everyone
was looking as if they were wondering whether to have the Love-r-ly Cup
in the sitting-room or the bedroom. You never saw such a hopeful gang
in your life.

Presently Izzy gave tongue. The management expects him to be humorous
on these occasions, so he did his best.

'Num-bahs, seven, eleven, and twenty-one will kindly rejoin their
sorrowing friends.'

This gave us a little more elbow-room, and the band started again.

A few minutes later, Izzy once more: 'Num-bahs thirteen, sixteen, and
seventeen--good-bye.'

Off we went again.

'Num-bah twelve, we hate to part with you, but--back to your table!'

A plump girl in a red hat, who had been dancing with a kind smile, as
if she were doing it to amuse the children, left the floor.

'Num-bahs six, fifteen, and twenty, thumbs down!'

And pretty soon the only couples left were Charlie and me, Mrs Charlie
and the fellow I'd introduced her to, and a bald-headed man and a girl
in a white hat. He was one of your stick-at-it performers. He had been
dancing all the evening. I had noticed him from the balcony. He looked
like a hard-boiled egg from up there.

He was a trier all right, that fellow, and had things been otherwise,
so to speak, I'd have been glad to see him win. But it was not to be.
Ah, no!

'Num-bah nineteen, you're getting all flushed. Take a rest.'

So there it was, a straight contest between me and Charlie and Mrs
Charlie and her man. Every nerve in my system was tingling with
suspense and excitement, was it not? It was not.

Charlie, as I've already hinted, was not a dancer who took much of his
attention off his feet while in action. He was there to do his
durnedest, not to inspect objects of interest by the wayside. The
correspondence college he'd attended doesn't guarantee to teach you to
do two things at once. It won't bind itself to teach you to look round
the room while you're dancing. So Charlie hadn't the least suspicion of
the state of the drama. He was breathing heavily down my neck in a
determined sort of way, with his eyes glued to the floor. All he knew
was that the competition had thinned out a bit, and the honour of
Ashley, Maine, was in his hands.

You know how the public begins to sit up and take notice when these
dance-contests have been narrowed down to two couples. There are
evenings when I quite forget myself, when I'm one of the last two left
in, and get all excited. There's a sort of hum in the air, and, as you
go round the room, people at the tables start applauding. Why, if you
didn't know about the inner workings of the thing, you'd be all of a
twitter.

It didn't take my practised ear long to discover that it wasn't me and
Charlie that the great public was cheering for. We would go round the
floor without getting a hand, and every time Mrs Charlie and her guy
got to a corner there was a noise like election night. She sure had
made a hit.

I took a look at her across the floor, and I didn't wonder. She was a
different kid from what she'd been upstairs. I never saw anybody look
so happy and pleased with herself. Her eyes were like lamps, and her
cheeks all pink, and she was going at it like a champion. I knew what
had made a hit with the people. It was the look of her. She made you
think of fresh milk and new-laid eggs and birds singing. To see her was
like getting away to the country in August. It's funny about people who
live in the city. They chuck out their chests, and talk about little
old New York being good enough for them, and there's a street in heaven
they call Broadway, and all the rest of it; but it seems to me that
what they really live for is that three weeks in the summer when they
get away into the country. I knew exactly why they were cheering so
hard for Mrs Charlie. She made them think of their holidays which were
coming along, when they would go and board at the farm and drink out of
the old oaken bucket, and call the cows by their first names.

Gee! I felt just like that myself. All day the country had been tugging
at me, and now it tugged worse than ever.

I could have smelled the new-mown hay if it wasn't that when you're in
Geisenheimer's you have to smell Geisenheimer's, because it leaves no
chance for competition.

'Keep working,' I said to Charlie. 'It looks to me as if we are going
back in the betting.'

'Uh, huh!' he says, too busy to blink.

'Do some of those fancy steps of yours. We need them in our business.'

And the way that boy worked--it was astonishing!

Out of the corner of my eye I could see Izzy Baermann, and he wasn't
looking happy. He was nerving himself for one of those quick referee's
decisions--the sort you make and then duck under the ropes, and run
five miles, to avoid the incensed populace. It was this kind of thing
happening every now and then that prevented his job being perfect.
Mabel Francis told me that one night when Izzy declared her the winner
of the great sporting contest, it was such raw work that she thought
there'd have been a riot. It looked pretty much as if he was afraid the
same thing was going to happen now. There wasn't a doubt which of us
two couples was the one that the customers wanted to see win that
Love-r-ly Silver Cup. It was a walk-over for Mrs Charlie, and Charlie
and I were simply among those present.

But Izzy had his duty to do, and drew a salary for doing it, so he
moistened his lips, looked round to see that his strategic railways
weren't blocked, swallowed twice, and said in a husky voice:

'Num-bah ten, please re-tiah!'

I stopped at once.

'Come along,' said I to Charlie. 'That's our exit cue.'

And we walked off the floor amidst applause.

'Well,' says Charlie, taking out his handkerchief and attending to his
brow, which was like the village blacksmith's, 'we didn't do so bad,
did we? We didn't do so bad, I guess! We--'

And he looked up at the balcony, expecting to see the dear little wife,
draped over the rail, worshipping him; when, just as his eye is moving
up, it gets caught by the sight of her a whole heap lower down than he
had expected--on the floor, in fact.

She wasn't doing much in the worshipping line just at that moment. She
was too busy.

It was a regular triumphal progress for the kid. She and her partner
were doing one or two rounds now for exhibition purposes, like the
winning couple always do at Geisenheimer's, and the room was fairly
rising at them. You'd have thought from the way they were clapping that
they had been betting all their spare cash on her.

Charlie gets her well focused, then he lets his jaw drop, till he
pretty near bumped it against the floor.

'But--but--but--' he begins.

'I know,' I said. 'It begins to look as if she could dance well enough
for the city after all. It begins to look as if she had sort of put one
over on somebody, don't it? It begins to look as if it were a pity you
didn't think of dancing with her yourself.'

'I--I--I--'

'You come along and have a nice cold drink,' I said, 'and you'll soon
pick up.'

He tottered after me to a table, looking as if he had been hit by a
street-car. He had got his.

I was so busy looking after Charlie, flapping the towel and working on
him with the oxygen, that, if you'll believe me, it wasn't for quite a
time that I thought of glancing around to see how the thing had struck
Izzy Baermann.

If you can imagine a fond father whose only son has hit him with a
brick, jumped on his stomach, and then gone off with all his money, you
have a pretty good notion of how poor old Izzy looked. He was staring
at me across the room, and talking to himself and jerking his hands
about. Whether he thought he was talking to me, or whether he was
rehearsing the scene where he broke it to the boss that a mere stranger
had got away with his Love-r-ly Silver Cup, I don't know. Whichever it
was, he was being mighty eloquent.

I gave him a nod, as much as to say that it would all come right in the
future, and then I turned to Charlie again. He was beginning to pick
up.

'She won the cup!' he said in a dazed voice, looking at me as if I
could do something about it.

'You bet she did!'

'But--well, what do you know about that?'

I saw that the moment had come to put it straight to him. 'I'll tell
you what I know about it,' I said. 'If you take my advice, you'll hustle
that kid straight back to Ashley--or wherever it is that you said you
poison the natives by making up the wrong prescriptions--before she
gets New York into her system. When I was talking to her upstairs, she
was telling me about a fellow in her village who got it in the neck
just the same as you're apt to do.'

He started. 'She was telling you about Jack Tyson?'

'That was his name--Jack Tyson. He lost his wife through letting her
have too much New York. Don't you think it's funny she should have
mentioned him if she hadn't had some idea that she might act just the
same as his wife did?'

He turned quite green.

'You don't think she would do that?'

'Well, if you'd heard her--She couldn't talk of anything except this
Tyson, and what his wife did to him. She talked of it sort of sad, kind
of regretful, as if she was sorry, but felt that it had to be. I could
see she had been thinking about it a whole lot.'

Charlie stiffened in his seat, and then began to melt with pure fright.
He took up his empty glass with a shaking hand and drank a long drink
out of it. It didn't take much observation to see that he had had the
jolt he wanted, and was going to be a whole heap less jaunty and
metropolitan from now on. In fact, the way he looked, I should say he
had finished with metropolitan jauntiness for the rest of his life.

'I'll take her home tomorrow,' he said. 'But--will she come?'

'That's up to you. If you can persuade her--Here she is now. I should
start at once.'

Mrs Charlie, carrying the cup, came to the table. I was wondering what
would be the first thing she would say. If it had been Charlie, of
course he'd have said, 'This is the life!' but I looked for something
snappier from her. If I had been in her place there were at least ten
things I could have thought of to say, each nastier than the other.

She sat down and put the cup on the table. Then she gave the cup a long
look. Then she drew a deep breath. Then she looked at Charlie.

'Oh, Charlie, dear,' she said, 'I do wish I'd been dancing with you!'

Well, I'm not sure that that wasn't just as good as anything I would
have said. Charlie got right off the mark. After what I had told him,
he wasn't wasting any time.

'Darling,' he said, humbly, 'you're a wonder! What will they say about
this at home?' He did pause here for a moment, for it took nerve to say
it; but then he went right on. 'Mary, how would it be if we went home
right away--first train tomorrow, and showed it to them?'

'Oh, Charlie!' she said.

His face lit up as if somebody had pulled a switch.

'You will? You don't want to stop on? You aren't wild about New York?'

'If there was a train,' she said, 'I'd start tonight. But I thought you
loved the city so, Charlie?'

He gave a kind of shiver. 'I never want to see it again in my life!' he
said.

'You'll excuse me,' I said, getting up, 'I think there's a friend of
mine wants to speak to me.'

And I crossed over to where Izzy had been standing for the last five
minutes, making signals to me with his eyebrows.

You couldn't have called Izzy coherent at first. He certainly had
trouble with his vocal chords, poor fellow. There was one of those
African explorer men used to come to Geisenheimer's a lot when he was
home from roaming the trackless desert, and he used to tell me about
tribes he had met who didn't use real words at all, but talked to one
another in clicks and gurgles. He imitated some of their chatter one
night to amuse me, and, believe me, Izzy Baermann started talking the
same language now. Only he didn't do it to amuse me.

He was like one of those gramophone records when it's getting into its
stride.

'Be calm, Isadore,' I said. 'Something is troubling you. Tell me all
about it.'

He clicked some more, and then he got it out.

'Say, are you crazy? What did you do it for? Didn't I tell you as plain
as I could; didn't I say it twenty times, when you came for the
tickets, that yours was thirty-six?'

'Didn't you say my friend's was thirty-six?'

'Are you deaf? I said hers was ten.'

'Then,' I said handsomely, 'say no more. The mistake was mine. It
begins to look as if I must have got them mixed.'

He did a few Swedish exercises.

'Say no more? That's good! That's great! You've got nerve. I'll say
that.'

'It was a lucky mistake, Izzy. It saved your life. The people would
have lynched you if you had given me the cup. They were solid for her.'

'What's the boss going to say when I tell him?'

'Never mind what the boss will say. Haven't you any romance in your
system, Izzy? Look at those two sitting there with their heads
together. Isn't it worth a silver cup to have made them happy for life?
They are on their honeymoon, Isadore. Tell the boss exactly how it
happened, and say that I thought it was up to Geisenheimer's to give
them a wedding-present.'

He clicked for a spell.

'Ah!' he said. 'Ah! now you've done it! Now you've given yourself away!
You did it on purpose. You mixed those tickets on purpose. I thought as
much. Say, who do you think you are, doing this sort of thing? Don't
you know that professional dancers are three for ten cents? I could go
out right now and whistle, and get a dozen girls for your job. The
boss'll sack you just one minute after I tell him.'

'No, he won't, Izzy, because I'm going to resign.'

'You'd better!'

'That's what I think. I'm sick of this place, Izzy. I'm sick of
dancing. I'm sick of New York. I'm sick of everything. I'm going back
to the country. I thought I had got the pigs and chickens clear out of
my system, but I hadn't. I've suspected it for a long, long time, and
tonight I know it. Tell the boss, with my love, that I'm sorry, but it
had to be done. And if he wants to talk back, he must do it by letter:
Mrs John Tyson, Rodney, Maine, is the address.'




THE MAKING OF MAC'S


Mac's Restaurant--nobody calls it MacFarland's--is a mystery. It is off
the beaten track. It is not smart. It does not advertise. It provides
nothing nearer to an orchestra than a solitary piano, yet, with all
these things against it, it is a success. In theatrical circles
especially it holds a position which might turn the white lights of
many a supper-palace green with envy.

This is mysterious. You do not expect Soho to compete with and even
eclipse Piccadilly in this way. And when Soho does so compete, there is
generally romance of some kind somewhere in the background.

Somebody happened to mention to me casually that Henry, the old waiter,
had been at Mac's since its foundation.

'Me?' said Henry, questioned during a slack spell in the afternoon.
'Rather!'

'Then can you tell me what it was that first gave the place the impetus
which started it on its upward course? What causes should you say were
responsible for its phenomenal prosperity? What--'

'What gave it a leg-up? Is that what you're trying to get at?'

'Exactly. What gave it a leg-up? Can you tell me?'

'Me?' said Henry. 'Rather!'

And he told me this chapter from the unwritten history of the London
whose day begins when Nature's finishes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old Mr MacFarland (_said Henry_) started the place fifteen years
ago. He was a widower with one son and what you might call half a
daughter. That's to say, he had adopted her. Katie was her name, and
she was the child of a dead friend of his. The son's name was Andy. A
little freckled nipper he was when I first knew him--one of those
silent kids that don't say much and have as much obstinacy in them as
if they were mules. Many's the time, in them days, I've clumped him on
the head and told him to do something; and he didn't run yelling to his
pa, same as most kids would have done, but just said nothing and went
on not doing whatever it was I had told him to do. That was the sort of
disposition Andy had, and it grew on him. Why, when he came back from
Oxford College the time the old man sent for him--what I'm going to
tell you about soon--he had a jaw on him like the ram of a battleship.
Katie was the kid for my money. I liked Katie. We all liked Katie.

Old MacFarland started out with two big advantages. One was Jules, and
the other was me. Jules came from Paris, and he was the greatest cook
you ever seen. And me--well, I was just come from ten years as waiter
at the Guelph, and I won't conceal it from you that I gave the place a
tone. I gave Soho something to think about over its chop, believe me.
It was a come-down in the world for me, maybe, after the Guelph, but
what I said to myself was that, when you get a tip in Soho, it may be
only tuppence, but you keep it; whereas at the Guelph about ninety-nine
hundredths of it goes to helping to maintain some blooming head waiter
in the style to which he has been accustomed. It was through my kind of
harping on that fact that me and the Guelph parted company. The head
waiter complained to the management the day I called him a fat-headed
vampire.

Well, what with me and what with Jules, MacFarland's--it wasn't Mac's
in them days--began to get a move on. Old MacFarland, who knew a good
man when he saw one and always treated me more like a brother than
anything else, used to say to me, 'Henry, if this keeps up, I'll be
able to send the boy to Oxford College'; until one day he changed it
to, 'Henry, I'm going to send the boy to Oxford College'; and next
year, sure enough, off he went.

Katie was sixteen then, and she had just been given the cashier job, as
a treat. She wanted to do something to help the old man, so he put her
on a high chair behind a wire cage with a hole in it, and she gave the
customers their change. And let me tell you, mister, that a man that
wasn't satisfied after he'd had me serve him a dinner cooked by Jules
and then had a chat with Katie through the wire cage would have groused
at Paradise. For she was pretty, was Katie, and getting prettier every
day. I spoke to the boss about it. I said it was putting temptation in
the girl's way to set her up there right in the public eye, as it were.
And he told me to hop it. So I hopped it.

Katie was wild about dancing. Nobody knew it till later, but all this
while, it turned out, she was attending regular one of them schools.
That was where she went to in the afternoons, when we all thought she
was visiting girl friends. It all come out after, but she fooled us
then. Girls are like monkeys when it comes to artfulness. She called me
Uncle Bill, because she said the name Henry always reminded her of cold
mutton. If it had been young Andy that had said it I'd have clumped him
one; but he never said anything like that. Come to think of it, he
never said anything much at all. He just thought a heap without opening
his face.

So young Andy went off to college, and I said to him, 'Now then, you
young devil, you be a credit to us, or I'll fetch you a clip when you
come home.' And Katie said, 'Oh, Andy, I _shall_ miss you.' And
Andy didn't say nothing to me, and he didn't say nothing to Katie, but
he gave her a look, and later in the day I found her crying, and she
said she'd got toothache, and I went round the corner to the chemist's
and brought her something for it.

It was in the middle of Andy's second year at college that the old man
had the stroke which put him out of business. He went down under it as
if he'd been hit with an axe, and the doctor tells him he'll never be
able to leave his bed again.

So they sent for Andy, and he quit his college, and come back to London
to look after the restaurant.

I was sorry for the kid. I told him so in a fatherly kind of way. And
he just looked at me and says, 'Thanks very much, Henry.'

'What must be must be,' I says. 'Maybe, it's all for the best. Maybe
it's better you're here than in among all those young devils in your
Oxford school what might be leading you astray.'

'If you would think less of me and more of your work, Henry,' he says,
'perhaps that gentleman over there wouldn't have to shout sixteen times
for the waiter.'

Which, on looking into it, I found to be the case, and he went away
without giving me no tip, which shows what you lose in a hard world by
being sympathetic.

I'm bound to say that young Andy showed us all jolly quick that he
hadn't come home just to be an ornament about the place. There was
exactly one boss in the restaurant, and it was him. It come a little
hard at first to have to be respectful to a kid whose head you had
spent many a happy hour clumping for his own good in the past; but he
pretty soon showed me I could do it if I tried, and I done it. As for
Jules and the two young fellers that had been taken on to help me owing
to increase of business, they would jump through hoops and roll over if
he just looked at them. He was a boy who liked his own way, was Andy,
and, believe me, at MacFarland's Restaurant he got it.

And then, when things had settled down into a steady jog, Katie took
the bit in her teeth.

She done it quite quiet and unexpected one afternoon when there was
only me and her and Andy in the place. And I don't think either of them
knew I was there, for I was taking an easy on a chair at the back,
reading an evening paper.

She said, kind of quiet, 'Oh, Andy.'

'Yes, darling,' he said.

And that was the first I knew that there was anything between them.

'Andy, I've something to tell you.'

'What is it?'

She kind of hesitated.

'Andy, dear, I shan't be able to help any more in the restaurant.'

He looked at her, sort of surprised.

'What do you mean?'

'I'm--I'm going on the stage.'

I put down my paper. What do you mean? Did I listen? Of course I
listened. What do you take me for?

From where I sat I could see young Andy's face, and I didn't need any
more to tell me there was going to be trouble. That jaw of his was
right out. I forgot to tell you that the old man had died, poor old
feller, maybe six months before, so that now Andy was the real boss
instead of just acting boss; and what's more, in the nature of things,
he was, in a manner of speaking, Katie's guardian, with power to tell
her what she could do and what she couldn't. And I felt that Katie
wasn't going to have any smooth passage with this stage business which
she was giving him. Andy didn't hold with the stage--not with any girl
he was fond of being on it anyway. And when Andy didn't like a thing he
said so.

He said so now.

'You aren't going to do anything of the sort.'

'Don't be horrid about it, Andy dear. I've got a big chance. Why should
you be horrid about it?'

'I'm not going to argue about it. You don't go.'

'But it's such a big chance. And I've been working for it for years.'

'How do you mean working for it?'

And then it came out about this dancing-school she'd been attending
regular.

When she'd finished telling him about it, he just shoved out his jaw
another inch.

'You aren't going on the stage.'

'But it's such a chance. I saw Mr Mandelbaum yesterday, and he saw me
dance, and he was very pleased, and said he would give me a solo dance
to do in this new piece he's putting on.'

'You aren't going on the stage.'

What I always say is, you can't beat tact. If you're smooth and tactful
you can get folks to do anything you want; but if you just shove your
jaw out at them, and order them about, why, then they get their backs
up and sauce you. I knew Katie well enough to know that she would do
anything for Andy, if he asked her properly; but she wasn't going to
stand this sort of thing. But you couldn't drive that into the head of
a feller like young Andy with a steam-hammer.

She flared up, quick, as if she couldn't hold herself in no longer.

'I certainly am,' she said.

'You know what it means?'

'What does it mean?'

'The end of--everything.'

She kind of blinked as if he'd hit her, then she chucks her chin up.

'Very well,' she says. 'Good-bye.'

'Good-bye,' says Andy, the pig-headed young mule; and she walks out one
way and he walks out another.

       *       *       *       *       *

I don't follow the drama much as a general rule, but seeing that it was
now, so to speak, in the family, I did keep an eye open for the
newspaper notices of 'The Rose Girl', which was the name of the piece
which Mr Mandelbaum was letting Katie do a solo dance in; and while
some of them cussed the play considerable, they all gave Katie a nice
word. One feller said that she was like cold water on the morning
after, which is high praise coming from a newspaper man.

There wasn't a doubt about it. She was a success. You see, she was
something new, and London always sits up and takes notice when you give
it that.

There were pictures of her in the papers, and one evening paper had a
piece about 'How I Preserve My Youth' signed by her. I cut it out and
showed it to Andy.

He gave it a look. Then he gave me a look, and I didn't like his eye.

'Well?' he says.

'Pardon,' I says.

'What about it?' he says.

'I don't know,' I says.

'Get back to your work,' he says.

So I got back.

It was that same night that the queer thing happened.

We didn't do much in the supper line at MacFarland's as a rule in them
days, but we kept open, of course, in case Soho should take it into its
head to treat itself to a welsh rabbit before going to bed; so all
hands was on deck, ready for the call if it should come, at half past
eleven that night; but we weren't what you might term sanguine.

Well, just on the half-hour, up drives a taxicab, and in comes a party
of four. There was a nut, another nut, a girl, and another girl. And
the second girl was Katie.

'Hallo, Uncle Bill!' she says.

'Good evening, madam,' I says dignified, being on duty.

'Oh, stop it, Uncle Bill,' she says. 'Say "Hallo!" to a pal, and smile
prettily, or I'll tell them about the time you went to the White City.'

Well, there's some bygones that are best left bygones, and the night at
the White City what she was alluding to was one of them. I still
maintain, as I always shall maintain, that the constable had no right
to--but, there, it's a story that wouldn't interest you. And, anyway,
I was glad to see Katie again, so I give her a smile.

'Not so much of it,' I says. 'Not so much of it. I'm glad to see you,
Katie.'

'Three cheers! Jimmy, I want to introduce you to my friend, Uncle Bill.
Ted, this is Uncle Bill. Violet, this is Uncle Bill.'

It wasn't my place to fetch her one on the side of the head, but I'd of
liked to have; for she was acting like she'd never used to act when I
knew her--all tough and bold. Then it come to me that she was nervous.
And natural, too, seeing young Andy might pop out any moment.

And sure enough out he popped from the back room at that very instant.
Katie looked at him, and he looked at Katie, and I seen his face get
kind of hard; but he didn't say a word. And presently he went out
again.

I heard Katie breathe sort of deep.

'He's looking well, Uncle Bill, ain't he?' she says to me, very soft.

'Pretty fair,' I says. 'Well, kid, I been reading the pieces in the
papers. You've knocked 'em.'

'Ah, don't Bill,' she says, as if I'd hurt her. And me meaning only to
say the civil thing. Girls are rum.

When the party had paid their bill and give me a tip which made me
think I was back at the Guelph again--only there weren't any Dick
Turpin of a head waiter standing by for his share--they hopped it. But
Katie hung back and had a word with me.

'He _was_ looking well, wasn't he, Uncle Bill?'

'Rather!'

'Does--does he ever speak of me?'

'I ain't heard him.'

'I suppose he's still pretty angry with me, isn't he, Uncle Bill?
You're sure you've never heard him speak of me?'

So, to cheer her up, I tells her about the piece in the paper I showed
him; but it didn't seem to cheer her up any. And she goes out.

The very next night in she come again for supper, but with different
nuts and different girls. There was six of them this time, counting
her. And they'd hardly sat down at their table, when in come the
fellers she had called Jimmy and Ted with two girls. And they sat
eating of their suppers and chaffing one another across the floor, all
as pleasant and sociable as you please.

'I say, Katie,' I heard one of the nuts say, 'you were right. He's
worth the price of admission.'

I don't know who they meant, but they all laughed. And every now and
again I'd hear them praising the food, which I don't wonder at, for
Jules had certainly done himself proud. All artistic temperament, these
Frenchmen are. The moment I told him we had company, so to speak, he
blossomed like a flower does when you put it in water.

'Ah, see, at last!' he says, trying to grab me and kiss me. 'Our fame
has gone abroad in the world which amuses himself, ain't it? For a good
supper connexion I have always prayed, and he has arrived.'

Well, it did begin to look as if he was right. Ten high-class
supper-folk in an evening was pretty hot stuff for MacFarland's. I'm
bound to say I got excited myself. I can't deny that I missed the
Guelph at times.

On the fifth night, when the place was fairly packed and looked for all
the world like Oddy's or Romano's, and me and the two young fellers
helping me was working double tides, I suddenly understood, and I went
up to Katie and, bending over her very respectful with a bottle, I
whispers, 'Hot stuff, kid. This is a jolly fine boom you're working for
the old place.' And by the way she smiled back at me, I seen I had
guessed right.

Andy was hanging round, keeping an eye on things, as he always done,
and I says to him, when I was passing, 'She's doing us proud, bucking
up the old place, ain't she?' And he says, 'Get on with your work.' And
I got on.

Katie hung back at the door, when she was on her way out, and had a
word with me.

'Has he said anything about me, Uncle Bill?'

'Not a word,' I says.

And she goes out.

You've probably noticed about London, mister, that a flock of sheep
isn't in it with the nuts, the way they all troop on each other's heels
to supper-places. One month they're all going to one place, next month
to another. Someone in the push starts the cry that he's found a new
place, and off they all go to try it. The trouble with most of the
places is that once they've got the custom they think it's going to
keep on coming and all they've got to do is to lean back and watch it
come. Popularity comes in at the door, and good food and good service
flies out at the window. We wasn't going to have any of that at
MacFarland's. Even if it hadn't been that Andy would have come down
like half a ton of bricks on the first sign of slackness, Jules and me
both of us had our professional reputations to keep up. I didn't give
myself no airs when I seen things coming our way. I worked all the
harder, and I seen to it that the four young fellers under me--there
was four now--didn't lose no time fetching of the orders.

The consequence was that the difference between us and most popular
restaurants was that we kept our popularity. We fed them well, and we
served them well; and once the thing had started rolling it didn't
stop. Soho isn't so very far away from the centre of things, when you
come to look at it, and they didn't mind the extra step, seeing that
there was something good at the end of it. So we got our popularity,
and we kept our popularity; and we've got it to this day. That's how
MacFarland's came to be what it is, mister.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the air of one who has told a well-rounded tale, Henry ceased, and
observed that it was wonderful the way Mr Woodward, of Chelsea,
preserved his skill in spite of his advanced years.

I stared at him.

'But, heavens, man!' I cried, 'you surely don't think you've finished?
What about Katie and Andy? What happened to them? Did they ever come
together again?'

'Oh, ah,' said Henry, 'I was forgetting!'

And he resumed.

       *       *       *       *       *

As time went on, I begin to get pretty fed up with young Andy. He was
making a fortune as fast as any feller could out of the sudden boom in
the supper-custom, and he knowing perfectly well that if it hadn't of
been for Katie there wouldn't of been any supper-custom at all; and
you'd of thought that anyone claiming to be a human being would have
had the gratitood to forgive and forget and go over and say a civil
word to Katie when she come in. But no, he just hung round looking
black at all of them; and one night he goes and fairly does it.

The place was full that night, and Katie was there, and the piano
going, and everybody enjoying themselves, when the young feller at the
piano struck up the tune what Katie danced to in the show. Catchy tune
it was. 'Lum-tum-tum, tiddle-iddle-um.' Something like that it went.
Well, the young feller struck up with it, and everybody begin clapping
and hammering on the tables and hollering to Katie to get up and dance;
which she done, in an open space in the middle, and she hadn't hardly
started when along come young Andy.

He goes up to her, all jaw, and I seen something that wanted dusting on
the table next to 'em, so I went up and began dusting it, so by good
luck I happened to hear the whole thing.

He says to her, very quiet, 'You can't do that here. What do you think
this place is?'

And she says to him, 'Oh, Andy!'

'I'm very much obliged to you,' he says, 'for all the trouble you
seem to be taking, but it isn't necessary. MacFarland's got on very
well before your well-meant efforts to turn it into a bear-garden.'

And him coining the money from the supper-custom! Sometimes I
think gratitood's a thing of the past and this world not fit for
a self-respecting rattlesnake to live in.

'Andy!' she says.

'That's all. We needn't argue about it. If you want to come here and
have supper, I can't stop you. But I'm not going to have the place
turned into a night-club.'

I don't know when I've heard anything like it. If it hadn't of been
that I hadn't of got the nerve, I'd have give him a look.

Katie didn't say another word, but just went back to her table.

But the episode, as they say, wasn't conclooded. As soon as the party
she was with seen that she was through dancing, they begin to kick up a
row; and one young nut with about an inch and a quarter of forehead and
the same amount of chin kicked it up especial.

'No, I say! I say, you know!' he hollered. 'That's too bad, you know.
Encore! Don't stop. Encore!'

Andy goes up to him.

'I must ask you, please, not to make so much noise,' he says, quite
respectful. 'You are disturbing people.'

'Disturbing be damned! Why shouldn't she--'

'One moment. You can make all the noise you please out in the street,
but as long as you stay in here you'll be quiet. Do you understand?'

Up jumps the nut. He'd had quite enough to drink. I know, because I'd
been serving him.

'Who the devil are you?' he says.

'Sit down,' says Andy.

And the young feller took a smack at him. And the next moment Andy had
him by the collar and was chucking him out in a way that would have
done credit to a real professional down Whitechapel way. He dumped him
on the pavement as neat as you please.

That broke up the party.

You can never tell with restaurants. What kills one makes another. I've
no doubt that if we had chucked out a good customer from the Guelph
that would have been the end of the place. But it only seemed to do
MacFarland's good. I guess it gave just that touch to the place which
made the nuts think that this was real Bohemia. Come to think of it, it
does give a kind of charm to a place, if you feel that at any moment
the feller at the next table to you may be gathered up by the slack of
his trousers and slung into the street.

Anyhow, that's the way our supper-custom seemed to look at it; and
after that you had to book a table in advance if you wanted to eat with
us. They fairly flocked to the place.

But Katie didn't. She didn't flock. She stayed away. And no wonder,
after Andy behaving so bad. I'd of spoke to him about it, only he
wasn't the kind of feller you do speak to about things.

One day I says to him to cheer him up, 'What price this restaurant now,
Mr Andy?'

'Curse the restaurant,' he says.

And him with all that supper-custom! It's a rum world!

Mister, have you ever had a real shock--something that came out of
nowhere and just knocked you flat? I have, and I'm going to tell you
about it.

When a man gets to be my age, and has a job of work which keeps him
busy till it's time for him to go to bed, he gets into the habit of not
doing much worrying about anything that ain't shoved right under his
nose. That's why, about now, Katie had kind of slipped my mind. It
wasn't that I wasn't fond of the kid, but I'd got so much to think
about, what with having four young fellers under me and things being in
such a rush at the restaurant that, if I thought of her at all, I just
took it for granted that she was getting along all right, and didn't
bother. To be sure we hadn't seen nothing of her at MacFarland's since
the night when Andy bounced her pal with the small size in foreheads,
but that didn't worry me. If I'd been her, I'd have stopped away the
same as she done, seeing that young Andy still had his hump. I took it
for granted, as I'm telling you, that she was all right, and that the
reason we didn't see nothing of her was that she was taking her
patronage elsewhere.

And then, one evening, which happened to be my evening off, I got a
letter, and for ten minutes after I read it I was knocked flat.

You get to believe in fate when you get to be my age, and fate certainly
had taken a hand in this game. If it hadn't of been my evening off,
don't you see, I wouldn't have got home till one o'clock or past that
in the morning, being on duty. Whereas, seeing it was my evening off,
I was back at half past eight.

I was living at the same boarding-house in Bloomsbury what I'd lived at
for the past ten years, and when I got there I find her letter shoved
half under my door.

I can tell you every word of it. This is how it went:

  _Darling Uncle Bill,_

  _Don't be too sorry when you read this. It is nobody's fault,
  but I am just tired of everything, and I want to end it all. You
  have been such a dear to me always that I want you to be good to
  me now. I should not like Andy to know the truth, so I want you
  to make it seem as if it had happened naturally. You will do this
  for me, won't you? It will be quite easy. By the time you get this,
  it will be one, and it will all be over, and you can just come up
  and open the window and let the gas out and then everyone will
  think I just died naturally. It will be quite easy. I am leaving
  the door unlocked so that you can get in. I am in the room just
  above yours. I took it yesterday, so as to be near you. Good-bye,
  Uncle Bill. You will do it for me, won't you? I don't want Andy to
  know what it really was._

                                           KATIE

That was it, mister, and I tell you it floored me. And then it come to
me, kind of as a new idea, that I'd best do something pretty soon, and
up the stairs I went quick.

There she was, on the bed, with her eyes closed, and the gas just
beginning to get bad.

As I come in, she jumped up, and stood staring at me. I went to the
tap, and turned the flow off, and then I gives her a look.

'Now then,' I says.

'How did you get here?'

'Never mind how I got here. What have you got to say for yourself?'

She just began to cry, same as she used to when she was a kid and
someone had hurt her.

'Here,' I says, 'let's get along out of here, and go where there's some
air to breathe. Don't you take on so. You come along out and tell me
all about it.'

She started to walk to where I was, and suddenly I seen she was
limping. So I gave her a hand down to my room, and set her on a chair.

'Now then,' I says again.

'Don't be angry with me, Uncle Bill,' she says.

And she looks at me so pitiful that I goes up to her and puts my arm
round her and pats her on the back.

'Don't you worry, dearie,' I says, 'nobody ain't going to be angry with
you. But, for goodness' sake,' I says, 'tell a man why in the name of
goodness you ever took and acted so foolish.'

'I wanted to end it all.'

'But why?'

She burst out a-crying again, like a kid.

'Didn't you read about it in the paper, Uncle Bill?'

'Read about what in the paper?'

'My accident. I broke my ankle at rehearsal ever so long ago, practising
my new dance. The doctors say it will never be right again. I shall
never be able to dance any more. I shall always limp. I shan't even be
able to walk properly. And when I thought of that ... and Andy ... and
everything ... I....'

I got on to my feet.

'Well, well, well,' I says. 'Well, well, well! I don't know as I blame
you. But don't you do it. It's a mug's game. Look here, if I leave you
alone for half an hour, you won't go trying it on again? Promise.'

'Very well, Uncle Bill. Where are you going?'

'Oh, just out. I'll be back soon. You sit there and rest yourself.'

It didn't take me ten minutes to get to the restaurant in a cab. I
found Andy in the back room.

'What's the matter, Henry?' he says.

'Take a look at this,' I says.

There's always this risk, mister, in being the Andy type of feller what
must have his own way and goes straight ahead and has it; and that is
that when trouble does come to him, it comes with a rush. It sometimes
seems to me that in this life we've all got to have trouble sooner or
later, and some of us gets it bit by bit, spread out thin, so to speak,
and a few of us gets it in a lump--_biff_! And that was what
happened to Andy, and what I knew was going to happen when I showed him
that letter. I nearly says to him, 'Brace up, young feller, because
this is where you get it.'

I don't often go to the theatre, but when I do I like one of those
plays with some ginger in them which the papers generally cuss. The
papers say that real human beings don't carry on in that way. Take it
from me, mister, they do. I seen a feller on the stage read a letter
once which didn't just suit him; and he gasped and rolled his eyes and
tried to say something and couldn't, and had to get a hold on a chair
to keep him from falling. There was a piece in the paper saying that
this was all wrong, and that he wouldn't of done them things in real
life. Believe me, the paper was wrong. There wasn't a thing that feller
did that Andy didn't do when he read that letter.

'God!' he says. 'Is she ... She isn't.... Were you in time?' he says.

And he looks at me, and I seen that he had got it in the neck, right
enough.

'If you mean is she dead,' I says, 'no, she ain't dead.'

'Thank God!'

'Not yet,' I says.

And the next moment we was out of that room and in the cab and moving
quick.

He was never much of a talker, wasn't Andy, and he didn't chat in that
cab. He didn't say a word till we was going up the stairs.

'Where?' he says.

'Here,' I says.

And I opens the door.

Katie was standing looking out of the window. She turned as the door
opened, and then she saw Andy. Her lips parted, as if she was going to
say something, but she didn't say nothing. And Andy, he didn't say
nothing, neither. He just looked, and she just looked.

And then he sort of stumbles across the room, and goes down on his
knees, and gets his arms around her.

'Oh, my kid' he says.

       *       *       *       *       *

And I seen I wasn't wanted, so I shut the door, and I hopped it. I went
and saw the last half of a music-hall. But, I don't know, it didn't
kind of have no fascination for me. You've got to give your mind to it
to appreciate good music-hall turns.




ONE TOUCH OF NATURE


The feelings of Mr J. Wilmot Birdsey, as he stood wedged in the crowd
that moved inch by inch towards the gates of the Chelsea Football
Ground, rather resembled those of a starving man who has just been
given a meal but realizes that he is not likely to get another for many
days. He was full and happy. He bubbled over with the joy of living and
a warm affection for his fellow-man. At the back of his mind there
lurked the black shadow of future privations, but for the moment he did
not allow it to disturb him. On this maddest, merriest day of all the
glad New Year he was content to revel in the present and allow the
future to take care of itself.

Mr Birdsey had been doing something which he had not done since he left
New York five years ago. He had been watching a game of baseball.

New York lost a great baseball fan when Hugo Percy de Wynter
Framlinghame, sixth Earl of Carricksteed, married Mae Elinor, only
daughter of Mr and Mrs J. Wilmot Birdsey of East Seventy-Third Street;
for scarcely had that internationally important event taken place when
Mrs Birdsey, announcing that for the future the home would be in
England as near as possible to dear Mae and dear Hugo, scooped J.
Wilmot out of his comfortable morris chair as if he had been a clam,
corked him up in a swift taxicab, and decanted him into a Deck B
stateroom on the _Olympic_. And there he was, an exile.

Mr Birdsey submitted to the worst bit of kidnapping since the days of
the old press gang with that delightful amiability which made him so
popular among his fellows and such a cypher in his home. At an early
date in his married life his position had been clearly defined beyond
possibility of mistake. It was his business to make money, and, when
called upon, to jump through hoops and sham dead at the bidding of his
wife and daughter Mae. These duties he had been performing
conscientiously for a matter of twenty years.

It was only occasionally that his humble role jarred upon him, for he
loved his wife and idolized his daughter. The international alliance
had been one of these occasions. He had no objection to Hugo Percy,
sixth Earl of Carricksteed. The crushing blow had been the sentence of
exile. He loved baseball with a love passing the love of women, and the
prospect of never seeing a game again in his life appalled him.

And then, one morning, like a voice from another world, had come the
news that the White Sox and the Giants were to give an exhibition in
London at the Chelsea Football Ground. He had counted the days like a
child before Christmas.

There had been obstacles to overcome before he could attend the game,
but he had overcome them, and had been seated in the front row when the
two teams lined up before King George.

And now he was moving slowly from the ground with the rest of the
spectators. Fate had been very good to him. It had given him a great
game, even unto two home-runs. But its crowning benevolence had been to
allot the seats on either side of him to two men of his own mettle, two
god-like beings who knew every move on the board, and howled like
wolves when they did not see eye to eye with the umpire. Long before
the ninth innings he was feeling towards them the affection of a
shipwrecked mariner who meets a couple of boyhood's chums on a desert
island.

As he shouldered his way towards the gate he was aware of these two
men, one on either side of him. He looked at them fondly, trying to
make up his mind which of them he liked best. It was sad to think that
they must soon go out of his life again for ever.

He came to a sudden resolution. He would postpone the parting. He would
ask them to dinner. Over the best that the Savoy Hotel could provide
they would fight the afternoon's battle over again. He did not know who
they were or anything about them, but what did that matter? They were
brother-fans. That was enough for him.

The man on his right was young, clean-shaven, and of a somewhat
vulturine cast of countenance. His face was cold and impassive now,
almost forbiddingly so; but only half an hour before it had been a
battle-field of conflicting emotions, and his hat still showed the dent
where he had banged it against the edge of his seat on the occasion of
Mr Daly's home-run. A worthy guest!

The man on Mr Birdsey's left belonged to another species of fan. Though
there had been times during the game when he had howled, for the most
part he had watched in silence so hungrily tense that a less
experienced observer than Mr Birdsey might have attributed his
immobility to boredom. But one glance at his set jaw and gleaming eyes
told him that here also was a man and a brother.

This man's eyes were still gleaming, and under their curiously deep tan
his bearded cheeks were pale. He was staring straight in front of him
with an unseeing gaze.

Mr Birdsey tapped the young man on the shoulder.

'Some game!' he said.

The young man looked at him and smiled.

'You bet,' he said.

'I haven't seen a ball-game in five years.'

'The last one I saw was two years ago next June.'

'Come and have some dinner at my hotel and talk it over,' said Mr
Birdsey impulsively.

'Sure!' said the young man.

Mr Birdsey turned and tapped the shoulder of the man on his left.

The result was a little unexpected. The man gave a start that was
almost a leap, and the pallor of his face became a sickly white. His
eyes, as he swung round, met Mr Birdsey's for an instant before they
dropped, and there was panic fear in them. His breath whistled softly
through clenched teeth.

Mr Birdsey was taken aback. The cordiality of the clean-shaven young
man had not prepared him for the possibility of such a reception. He
felt chilled. He was on the point of apologizing with some murmur about
a mistake, when the man reassured him by smiling. It was rather a
painful smile, but it was enough for Mr Birdsey. This man might be of a
nervous temperament, but his heart was in the right place.

He, too, smiled. He was a small, stout, red-faced little man, and he
possessed a smile that rarely failed to set strangers at their ease.
Many strenuous years on the New York Stock Exchange had not destroyed a
certain childlike amiability in Mr Birdsey, and it shone out when he
smiled at you.

'I'm afraid I startled you,' he said soothingly. 'I wanted to ask you
if you would let a perfect stranger, who also happens to be an exile,
offer you dinner tonight.'

The man winced. 'Exile?'

'An exiled fan. Don't you feel that the Polo Grounds are a good long
way away? This gentleman is joining me. I have a suite at the Savoy
Hotel, and I thought we might all have a quiet little dinner there and
talk about the game. I haven't seen a ball-game in five years.'

'Nor have I.'

'Then you must come. You really must. We fans ought to stick to one
another in a strange land. Do come.'

'Thank you,' said the bearded man; 'I will.'

When three men, all strangers, sit down to dinner together,
conversation, even if they happen to have a mutual passion for
baseball, is apt to be for a while a little difficult. The first fine
frenzy in which Mr Birdsey had issued his invitations had begun to ebb
by the time the soup was served, and he was conscious of a feeling of
embarrassment.

There was some subtle hitch in the orderly progress of affairs. He
sensed it in the air. Both of his guests were disposed to silence, and
the clean-shaven young man had developed a trick of staring at the man
with the beard, which was obviously distressing that sensitive person.

'Wine,' murmured Mr Birdsey to the waiter. 'Wine, wine!'

He spoke with the earnestness of a general calling up his reserves for
the grand attack. The success of this little dinner mattered enormously
to him. There were circumstances which were going to make it an oasis
in his life. He wanted it to be an occasion to which, in grey days to
come, he could look back and be consoled. He could not let it be a
failure.

He was about to speak when the young man anticipated him. Leaning
forward, he addressed the bearded man, who was crumbling bread with an
absent look in his eyes.

'Surely we have met before?' he said. 'I'm sure I remember your face.'

The effect of these words on the other was as curious as the effect of
Mr Birdsey's tap on the shoulder had been. He looked up like a hunted
animal.

He shook his head without speaking.

'Curious,' said the young man. 'I could have sworn to it, and I am
positive that it was somewhere in New York. Do you come from New York?'

'Yes.'

'It seems to me,' said Mr Birdsey, 'that we ought to introduce
ourselves. Funny it didn't strike any of us before. My name is Birdsey,
J. Wilmot Birdsey. I come from New York.'

'My name is Waterall,' said the young man. 'I come from New York.'

The bearded man hesitated.

'My name is Johnson. I--used to live in New York.'

'Where do you live now, Mr Johnson?' asked Waterall.

The bearded man hesitated again. 'Algiers,' he said.

Mr Birdsey was inspired to help matters along with small-talk.

'Algiers,' he said. 'I have never been there, but I understand that it
is quite a place. Are you in business there, Mr Johnson?'

'I live there for my health.'

'Have you been there some time?' inquired Waterall.

'Five years.'

'Then it must have been in New York that I saw you, for I have never
been to Algiers, and I'm certain I have seen you somewhere. I'm afraid
you will think me a bore for sticking to the point like this, but the
fact is, the one thing I pride myself on is my memory for faces. It's a
hobby of mine. If I think I remember a face, and can't place it, I
worry myself into insomnia. It's partly sheer vanity, and partly
because in my job a good memory for faces is a mighty fine asset. It
has helped me a hundred times.'

Mr Birdsey was an intelligent man, and he could see that Waterall's
table-talk was for some reason getting upon Johnson's nerves. Like a
good host, he endeavoured to cut in and make things smooth.

'I've heard great accounts of Algiers,' he said helpfully. 'A friend of
mine was there in his yacht last year. It must be a delightful spot.'

'It's a hell on earth,' snapped Johnson, and slew the conversation on
the spot.

Through a grim silence an angel in human form fluttered in--a waiter
bearing a bottle. The pop of the cork was more than music to Mr
Birdsey's ears. It was the booming of the guns of the relieving army.

The first glass, as first glasses will, thawed the bearded man, to the
extent of inducing him to try and pick up the fragments of the
conversation which he had shattered.

'I am afraid you will have thought me abrupt, Mr Birdsey,' he said
awkwardly; 'but then you haven't lived in Algiers for five years, and I
have.'

Mr Birdsey chirruped sympathetically.

'I liked it at first. It looked mighty good to me. But five years of it,
and nothing else to look forward to till you die....'

He stopped, and emptied his glass. Mr Birdsey was still perturbed.
True, conversation was proceeding in a sort of way, but it had taken a
distinctly gloomy turn. Slightly flushed with the excellent champagne
which he had selected for this important dinner, he endeavoured to
lighten it.

'I wonder,' he said, 'which of us three fans had the greatest
difficulty in getting to the bleachers today. I guess none of us found
it too easy.'

The young man shook his head.

'Don't count on me to contribute a romantic story to this Arabian
Night's Entertainment. My difficulty would have been to stop away. My
name's Waterall, and I'm the London correspondent of the _New York
Chronicle_. I had to be there this afternoon in the way of
business.'

Mr Birdsey giggled self-consciously, but not without a certain impish
pride.

'The laugh will be on me when you hear my confession. My daughter
married an English earl, and my wife brought me over here to mix with
his crowd. There was a big dinner-party tonight, at which the whole
gang were to be present, and it was as much as my life was worth to
side-step it. But when you get the Giants and the White Sox playing
ball within fifty miles of you--Well, I packed a grip and sneaked out
the back way, and got to the station and caught the fast train to
London. And what is going on back there at this moment I don't like to
think. About now,' said Mr Birdsey, looking at his watch, 'I guess
they'll be pronging the _hors d'oeuvres_ and gazing at the empty
chair. It was a shame to do it, but, for the love of Mike, what else
could I have done?'

He looked at the bearded man.

'Did you have any adventures, Mr Johnson?'

'No. I--I just came.'

The young man Waterall leaned forward. His manner was quiet, but his
eyes were glittering.

'Wasn't that enough of an adventure for you?' he said.

Their eyes met across the table. Seated between them, Mr Birdsey looked
from one to the other, vaguely disturbed. Something was happening, a
drama was going on, and he had not the key to it.

Johnson's face was pale, and the tablecloth crumpled into a crooked
ridge under his fingers, but his voice was steady as he replied:

'I don't understand.'

'Will you understand if I give you your right name, Mr Benyon?'

'What's all this?' said Mr Birdsey feebly.

Waterall turned to him, the vulturine cast of his face more noticeable
than ever. Mr Birdsey was conscious of a sudden distaste for this young
man.

'It's quite simple, Mr Birdsey. If you have not been entertaining
angels unawares, you have at least been giving a dinner to a celebrity.
I told you I was sure I had seen this gentleman before. I have just
remembered where, and when. This is Mr John Benyon, and I last saw him
five years ago when I was a reporter in New York, and covered his
trial.'

'His trial?'

'He robbed the New Asiatic Bank of a hundred thousand dollars, jumped
his bail, and was never heard of again.'

'For the love of Mike!'

Mr Birdsey stared at his guest with eyes that grew momently wider. He
was amazed to find that deep down in him there was an unmistakable
feeling of elation. He had made up his mind, when he left home that
morning, that this was to be a day of days. Well, nobody could call
this an anti-climax.

'So that's why you have been living in Algiers?'

Benyon did not reply. Outside, the Strand traffic sent a faint murmur
into the warm, comfortable room.

Waterall spoke. 'What on earth induced you, Benyon, to run the risk of
coming to London, where every second man you meet is a New Yorker, I
can't understand. The chances were two to one that you would be
recognized. You made a pretty big splash with that little affair of
yours five years ago.'

Benyon raised his head. His hands were trembling.

'I'll tell you,' he said with a kind of savage force, which hurt kindly
little Mr Birdsey like a blow. 'It was because I was a dead man, and
saw a chance of coming to life for a day; because I was sick of the
damned tomb I've been living in for five centuries; because I've been
aching for New York ever since I've left it--and here was a chance of
being back there for a few hours. I knew there was a risk. I took a
chance on it. Well?'

Mr Birdsey's heart was almost too full for words. He had found him at
last, the Super-Fan, the man who would go through fire and water for a
sight of a game of baseball. Till that moment he had been regarding
himself as the nearest approach to that dizzy eminence. He had braved
great perils to see this game. Even in this moment his mind would not
wholly detach itself from speculation as to what his wife would say to
him when he slunk back into the fold. But what had he risked compared
with this man Benyon? Mr Birdsey glowed. He could not restrain his
sympathy and admiration. True, the man was a criminal. He had robbed a
bank of a hundred thousand dollars. But, after all, what was that? They
would probably have wasted the money in foolishness. And, anyway, a
bank which couldn't take care of its money deserved to lose it.

Mr Birdsey felt almost a righteous glow of indignation against the New
Asiatic Bank.

He broke the silence which had followed Benyon's words with a
peculiarly immoral remark:

'Well, it's lucky it's only us that's recognized you,' he said.

Waterall stared. 'Are you proposing that we should hush this thing up,
Mr Birdsey?' he said coldly.

'Oh, well--'

Waterall rose and went to the telephone.

'What are you going to do?'

'Call up Scotland Yard, of course. What did you think?'

Undoubtedly the young man was doing his duty as a citizen, yet it is to
be recorded that Mr Birdsey eyed him with unmixed horror.

'You can't! You mustn't!' he cried.

'I certainly shall.'

'But--but--this fellow came all that way to see the ball-game.'

It seemed incredible to Mr Birdsey that this aspect of the affair
should not be the one to strike everybody to the exclusion of all other
aspects.

'You can't give him up. It's too raw.'

'He's a convicted criminal.'

'He's a fan. Why, say, he's _the_ fan.'

Waterall shrugged his shoulders, and walked to the telephone. Benyon
spoke.

'One moment.'

Waterall turned, and found himself looking into the muzzle of a small
pistol. He laughed.

'I expected that. Wave it about all you want.'

Benyon rested his shaking hand on the edge of the table.

'I'll shoot if you move.'

'You won't. You haven't the nerve. There's nothing to you. You're just
a cheap crook, and that's all. You wouldn't find the nerve to pull that
trigger in a million years.'

He took off the receiver.

'Give me Scotland Yard,' he said.

He had turned his back to Benyon. Benyon sat motionless. Then, with a
thud, the pistol fell to the ground. The next moment Benyon had broken
down. His face was buried in his arms, and he was a wreck of a man,
sobbing like a hurt child.

Mr Birdsey was profoundly distressed. He sat tingling and helpless.
This was a nightmare.

Waterall's level voice spoke at the telephone.

'Is this Scotland Yard? I am Waterall, of the _New York
Chronicle_. Is Inspector Jarvis there? Ask him to come to the
phone.... Is that you, Jarvis? This is Waterall. I'm speaking from the
Savoy, Mr Birdsey's rooms. Birdsey. Listen, Jarvis. There's a man here
that's wanted by the American police. Send someone here and get him.
Benyon. Robbed the New Asiatic Bank in New York. Yes, you've a warrant
out for him, five years old.... All right.'

He hung up the receiver. Benyon sprang to his feet. He stood, shaking,
a pitiable sight. Mr Birdsey had risen with him. They stood looking at
Waterall.

'You--skunk!' said Mr Birdsey.

'I'm an American citizen,' said Waterall, 'and I happen to have some
idea of a citizen's duties. What is more, I'm a newspaper man, and I
have some idea of my duty to my paper. Call me what you like, you won't
alter that.'

Mr Birdsey snorted.

'You're suffering from ingrowing sentimentality, Mr Birdsey. That's
what's the matter with you. Just because this man has escaped justice
for five years, you think he ought to be considered quit of the whole
thing.'

'But--but--'

'I don't.'

He took out his cigarette case. He was feeling a great deal more
strung-up and nervous than he would have had the others suspect. He had
had a moment of very swift thinking before he had decided to treat that
ugly little pistol in a spirit of contempt. Its production had given
him a decided shock, and now he was suffering from reaction. As a
consequence, because his nerves were strained, he lit his cigarette
very languidly, very carefully, and with an offensive superiority which
was to Mr Birdsey the last straw.

These things are matters of an instant. Only an infinitesimal fraction
of time elapsed between the spectacle of Mr Birdsey, indignant but
inactive, and Mr Birdsey berserk, seeing red, frankly and undisguisedly
running amok. The transformation took place in the space of time
required for the lighting of a match.

Even as the match gave out its flame, Mr Birdsey sprang.

Aeons before, when the young blood ran swiftly in his veins and life
was all before him, Mr Birdsey had played football. Once a footballer,
always a potential footballer, even to the grave. Time had removed the
flying tackle as a factor in Mr Birdsey's life. Wrath brought it back.
He dived at young Mr Waterall's neatly trousered legs as he had dived
at other legs, less neatly trousered, thirty years ago. They crashed to
the floor together; and with the crash came Mr Birdsey's shout:

'Run! Run, you fool! Run!'

And, even as he clung to his man, breathless, bruised, feeling as if
all the world had dissolved in one vast explosion of dynamite, the door
opened, banged to, and feet fled down the passage.

Mr Birdsey disentangled himself, and rose painfully. The shock had
brought him to himself. He was no longer berserk. He was a middle-aged
gentleman of high respectability who had been behaving in a very
peculiar way.

Waterall, flushed and dishevelled, glared at him speechlessly. He
gulped. 'Are you crazy?'

Mr Birdsey tested gingerly the mechanism of a leg which lay under
suspicion of being broken. Relieved, he put his foot to the ground
again. He shook his head at Waterall. He was slightly crumpled, but he
achieved a manner of dignified reproof.

'You shouldn't have done it, young man. It was raw work. Oh, yes, I
know all about that duty-of-a-citizen stuff. It doesn't go. There are
exceptions to every rule, and this was one of them. When a man risks
his liberty to come and root at a ball-game, you've got to hand it to
him. He isn't a crook. He's a fan. And we exiled fans have got to stick
together.'

Waterall was quivering with fury, disappointment, and the peculiar
unpleasantness of being treated by an elderly gentleman like a sack of
coals. He stammered with rage.

'You damned old fool, do you realize what you've done? The police will
be here in another minute.'

'Let them come.'

'But what am I to say to them? What explanation can I give? What story
can I tell them? Can't you see what a hole you've put me in?'

Something seemed to click inside Mr Birdsey's soul. It was the berserk
mood vanishing and reason leaping back on to her throne. He was able
now to think calmly, and what he thought about filled him with a sudden
gloom.

'Young man,' he said, 'don't worry yourself. You've got a cinch. You've
only got to hand a story to the police. Any old tale will do for them.
I'm the man with the really difficult job--I've got to square myself
with my wife!'




BLACK FOR LUCK


He was black, but comely. Obviously in reduced circumstances, he had
nevertheless contrived to retain a certain smartness, a certain
air--what the French call the _tournure_. Nor had poverty killed
in him the aristocrat's instinct of personal cleanliness; for even as
Elizabeth caught sight of him he began to wash himself.

At the sound of her step he looked up. He did not move, but there was
suspicion in his attitude. The muscles of his back contracted, his eyes
glowed like yellow lamps against black velvet, his tail switched a
little, warningly.

Elizabeth looked at him. He looked at Elizabeth. There was a pause,
while he summed her up. Then he stalked towards her, and, suddenly
lowering his head, drove it vigorously against her dress. He permitted
her to pick him up and carry him into the hall-way, where Francis, the
janitor, stood.

'Francis,' said Elizabeth, 'does this cat belong to anyone here?'

'No, miss. That cat's a stray, that cat is. I been trying to locate
that cat's owner for days.'

Francis spent his time trying to locate things. It was the one
recreation of his eventless life. Sometimes it was a noise, sometimes a
lost letter, sometimes a piece of ice which had gone astray in the
dumb-waiter--whatever it was, Francis tried to locate it.

'Has he been round here long, then?'

'I seen him snooping about a considerable time.'

'I shall keep him.'

'Black cats bring luck,' said Francis sententiously.

'I certainly shan't object to that,' said Elizabeth. She was feeling
that morning that a little luck would be a pleasing novelty. Things had
not been going very well with her of late. It was not so much that the
usual proportion of her manuscripts had come back with editorial
compliments from the magazine to which they had been sent--she accepted
that as part of the game; what she did consider scurvy treatment at the
hands of fate was the fact that her own pet magazine, the one to which
she had been accustomed to fly for refuge, almost sure of a
welcome--when coldly treated by all the others--had suddenly expired
with a low gurgle for want of public support. It was like losing a kind
and open-handed relative, and it made the addition of a black cat to
the household almost a necessity.

In her flat, the door closed, she watched her new ally with some
anxiety. He had behaved admirably on the journey upstairs, but she
would not have been surprised, though it would have pained her, if he
had now proceeded to try to escape through the ceiling. Cats were so
emotional. However, he remained calm, and, after padding silently about
the room for awhile, raised his head and uttered a crooning cry.

'That's right,' said Elizabeth, cordially. 'If you don't see what you
want, ask for it. The place is yours.'

She went to the ice-box, and produced milk and sardines. There was
nothing finicky or affected about her guest. He was a good trencherman,
and he did not care who knew it. He concentrated himself on the
restoration of his tissues with the purposeful air of one whose last
meal is a dim memory. Elizabeth, brooding over him like a Providence,
wrinkled her forehead in thought.

'Joseph,' she said at last, brightening; 'that's your name. Now settle
down, and start being a mascot.'

Joseph settled down amazingly. By the end of the second day he was
conveying the impression that he was the real owner of the apartment,
and that it was due to his good nature that Elizabeth was allowed the
run of the place. Like most of his species, he was an autocrat. He
waited a day to ascertain which was Elizabeth's favourite chair, then
appropriated it for his own. If Elizabeth closed a door while he was in
a room, he wanted it opened so that he might go out; if she closed it
while he was outside, he wanted it opened so that he might come in; if
she left it open, he fussed about the draught. But the best of us have
our faults, and Elizabeth adored him in spite of his.

It was astonishing what a difference he made in her life. She was a
friendly soul, and until Joseph's arrival she had had to depend for
company mainly on the footsteps of the man in the flat across the way.
Moreover, the building was an old one, and it creaked at night. There
was a loose board in the passage which made burglar noises in the dark
behind you when you stepped on it on the way to bed; and there were
funny scratching sounds which made you jump and hold your breath.
Joseph soon put a stop to all that. With Joseph around, a loose board
became a loose board, nothing more, and a scratching noise just a plain
scratching noise.

And then one afternoon he disappeared.

Having searched the flat without finding him, Elizabeth went to the
window, with the intention of making a bird's-eye survey of the street.
She was not hopeful, for she had just come from the street, and there
had been no sign of him then.

Outside the window was a broad ledge, running the width of the
building. It terminated on the left, in a shallow balcony belonging to
the flat whose front door faced hers--the flat of the young man whose
footsteps she sometimes heard. She knew he was a young man, because
Francis had told her so. His name, James Renshaw Boyd, she had learned
from the same source.

On this shallow balcony, licking his fur with the tip of a crimson
tongue and generally behaving as if he were in his own backyard, sat
Joseph.

'Jo-seph!' cried Elizabeth--surprise, joy, and reproach combining to
give her voice an almost melodramatic quiver.

He looked at her coldly. Worse, he looked at her as if she had been an
utter stranger. Bulging with her meat and drink, he cut her dead; and,
having done so, turned and walked into the next flat.

Elizabeth was a girl of spirit. Joseph might look at her as if she were
a saucerful of tainted milk, but he was her cat, and she meant to get
him back. She went out and rang the bell of Mr James Renshaw Boyd's
flat.

The door was opened by a shirt-sleeved young man. He was by no means an
unsightly young man. Indeed, of his type--the rough-haired,
clean-shaven, square-jawed type--he was a distinctly good-looking young
man. Even though she was regarding him at the moment purely in the
light of a machine for returning strayed cats, Elizabeth noticed that.

She smiled upon him. It was not the fault of this nice-looking young
man that his sitting-room window was open; or that Joseph was an
ungrateful little beast who should have no fish that night.

'Would you mind letting me have my cat, please?' she said pleasantly.
'He has gone into your sitting-room through the window.'

He looked faintly surprised.

'Your cat?'

'My black cat, Joseph. He is in your sitting-room.'

'I'm afraid you have come to the wrong place. I've just left my
sitting-room, and the only cat there is my black cat, Reginald.'

'But I saw Joseph go in only a minute ago.'

'That was Reginald.'

For the first time, as one who examining a fair shrub abruptly
discovers that it is a stinging-nettle, Elizabeth realized the truth.
This was no innocent young man who stood before her, but the blackest
criminal known to criminologists--a stealer of other people's cats. Her
manner shot down to zero.

'May I ask how long you have had your Reginald?'

'Since four o'clock this afternoon.'

'Did he come in through the window?'

'Why, yes. Now you mention it, he did.'

'I must ask you to be good enough to give me back my cat,' said
Elizabeth, icily.

He regarded her defensively.

'Assuming,' he said, 'purely for the purposes of academic argument,
that your Joseph is my Reginald, couldn't we come to an agreement of
some sort? Let me buy you another cat. A dozen cats.'

'I don't want a dozen cats. I want Joseph.'

'Fine, fat, soft cats,' he went on persuasively. 'Lovely, affectionate
Persians and Angoras, and--'

'Of course, if you intend to steal Joseph--'

'These are harsh words. Any lawyer will tell you that there are special
statutes regarding cats. To retain a stray cat is not a tort or a
misdemeanour. In the celebrated test-case of Wiggins _v_. Bluebody
it was established--'

'Will you please give me back my cat?'

She stood facing him, her chin in the air and her eyes shining, and the
young man suddenly fell a victim to conscience.

'Look here,' he said, 'I'll throw myself on your mercy. I admit the cat
is your cat, and that I have no right to it, and that I am just a
common sneak-thief. But consider. I had just come back from the first
rehearsal of my first play; and as I walked in at the door that cat
walked in at the window. I'm as superstitious as a coon, and I felt
that to give him up would be equivalent to killing the play before ever
it was produced. I know it will sound absurd to you. _You_ have no
idiotic superstitions. You are sane and practical. But, in the
circumstances, if you _could_ see your way to waiving your
rights--'

Before the wistfulness of his eye Elizabeth capitulated. She felt quite
overcome by the revulsion of feeling which swept through her. How she
had misjudged him! She had taken him for an ordinary soulless purloiner
of cats, a snapper-up of cats at random and without reason; and all the
time he had been reluctantly compelled to the act by this deep and
praiseworthy motive. All the unselfishness and love of sacrifice innate
in good women stirred within her.

'Why, of _course_ you mustn't let him go! It would mean awful bad
luck.'

'But how about you--'

'Never mind about me. Think of all the people who are dependent on your
play being a success.'

The young man blinked.

'This is overwhelming,' he said.

'I had no notion why you wanted him. He was nothing to me--at least,
nothing much--that is to say--well, I suppose I was rather fond of
him--but he was not--not--'

'Vital?'

'That's just the word I wanted. He was just company, you know.'

'Haven't you many friends?'

'I haven't any friends.'

'You haven't any friends! That settles it. You must take him back.'

'I couldn't think of it.'

'Of course you must take him back at once.'

'I really couldn't.'

'You must.'

'I won't.'

'But, good gracious, how do you suppose I should feel, knowing that you
were all alone and that I had sneaked your--your ewe lamb, as it were?'

'And how do you suppose I should feel if your play failed simply for
lack of a black cat?'

He started, and ran his fingers through his rough hair in an
overwrought manner.

'Solomon couldn't have solved this problem,' he said. 'How would it
be--it seems the only possible way out--if you were to retain a sort of
managerial right in him? Couldn't you sometimes step across and chat
with him--and me, incidentally--over here? I'm very nearly as lonesome
as you are. Chicago is my home. I hardly know a soul in New York.'

Her solitary life in the big city had forced upon Elizabeth the ability
to form instantaneous judgements on the men she met. She flashed a
glance at the young man and decided in his favour.

'It's very kind of you,' she said. 'I should love to. I want to hear
all about your play. I write myself, you know, in a very small way, so
a successful playwright is Someone to me.'

'I wish I were a successful playwright.'

'Well, you are having the first play you have ever written produced on
Broadway. That's pretty wonderful.'

''M--yes,' said the young man. It seemed to Elizabeth that he spoke
doubtfully, and this modesty consolidated the favourable impression she
had formed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gods are just. For every ill which they inflict they also supply a
compensation. It seems good to them that individuals in big cities
shall be lonely, but they have so arranged that, if one of these
individuals does at last contrive to seek out and form a friendship
with another, that friendship shall grow more swiftly than the tepid
acquaintanceships of those on whom the icy touch of loneliness has
never fallen. Within a week Elizabeth was feeling that she had known
this James Renshaw Boyd all her life.

And yet there was a tantalizing incompleteness about his personal
reminiscences. Elizabeth was one of those persons who like to begin a
friendship with a full statement of their position, their previous
life, and the causes which led up to their being in this particular
spot at this particular time. At their next meeting, before he had had
time to say much on his own account, she had told him of her life in
the small Canadian town where she had passed the early part of her
life; of the rich and unexpected aunt who had sent her to college for
no particular reason that anyone could ascertain except that she
enjoyed being unexpected; of the legacy from this same aunt, far
smaller than might have been hoped for, but sufficient to send a
grateful Elizabeth to New York, to try her luck there; of editors,
magazines, manuscripts refused or accepted, plots for stories; of life
in general, as lived down where the Arch spans Fifth Avenue and the
lighted cross of the Judson shines by night on Washington Square.

Ceasing eventually, she waited for him to begin; and he did not
begin--not, that is to say, in the sense the word conveyed to
Elizabeth. He spoke briefly of college, still more briefly of
Chicago--which city he appeared to regard with a distaste that made
Lot's attitude towards the Cities of the Plain almost kindly by
comparison. Then, as if he had fulfilled the demands of the most
exacting inquisitor in the matter of personal reminiscence, he began to
speak of the play.

The only facts concerning him to which Elizabeth could really have
sworn with a clear conscience at the end of the second week of their
acquaintance were that he was very poor, and that this play meant
everything to him.

The statement that it meant everything to him insinuated itself so
frequently into his conversation that it weighed on Elizabeth's mind
like a burden, and by degrees she found herself giving the play place
of honour in her thoughts over and above her own little ventures. With
this stupendous thing hanging in the balance, it seemed almost wicked
of her to devote a moment to wondering whether the editor of an evening
paper, who had half promised to give her the entrancing post of Adviser
to the Lovelorn on his journal, would fulfil that half-promise.

At an early stage in their friendship the young man had told her the
plot of the piece; and if he had not unfortunately forgotten several
important episodes and had to leap back to them across a gulf of one or
two acts, and if he had referred to his characters by name instead of
by such descriptions as 'the fellow who's in love with the girl--not
what's-his-name but the other chap'--she would no doubt have got that
mental half-Nelson on it which is such a help towards the proper
understanding of a four-act comedy. As it was, his precis had left her
a little vague; but she said it was perfectly splendid, and he said did
she really think so. And she said yes, she did, and they were both
happy.

Rehearsals seemed to prey on his spirits a good deal. He attended them
with the pathetic regularity of the young dramatist, but they appeared
to bring him little balm. Elizabeth generally found him steeped in
gloom, and then she would postpone the recital, to which she had been
looking forward, of whatever little triumph she might have happened to
win, and devote herself to the task of cheering him up. If women were
wonderful in no other way, they would be wonderful for their genius for
listening to shop instead of talking it.

Elizabeth was feeling more than a little proud of the way in which her
judgement of this young man was being justified. Life in Bohemian New
York had left her decidedly wary of strange young men, not formally
introduced; her faith in human nature had had to undergo much
straining. Wolves in sheep's clothing were common objects of the
wayside in her unprotected life; and perhaps her chief reason for
appreciating this friendship was the feeling of safety which it gave
her.

Their relations, she told herself, were so splendidly unsentimental.
There was no need for that silent defensiveness which had come to seem
almost an inevitable accompaniment to dealings with the opposite sex.
James Boyd, she felt, she could trust; and it was wonderful how
soothing the reflexion was.

And that was why, when the thing happened, it so shocked and frightened
her.

It had been one of their quiet evenings. Of late they had fallen into
the habit of sitting for long periods together without speaking. But it
had differed from other quiet evenings through the fact that
Elizabeth's silence hid a slight but well-defined feeling of injury.
Usually she sat happy with her thoughts, but tonight she was ruffled.
She had a grievance.

That afternoon the editor of the evening paper, whose angelic status
not even a bald head and an absence of wings and harp could conceal,
had definitely informed her that the man who had conducted the column
hitherto having resigned, the post of Heloise Milton, official adviser
to readers troubled with affairs of the heart, was hers; and he looked
to her to justify the daring experiment of letting a woman handle so
responsible a job. Imagine how Napoleon felt after Austerlitz, picture
Colonel Goethale contemplating the last spadeful of dirt from the
Panama Canal, try to visualize a suburban householder who sees a flower
emerging from the soil in which he has inserted a packet of guaranteed
seeds, and you will have some faint conception how Elizabeth felt as
those golden words proceeded from that editor's lips. For the moment
Ambition was sated. The years, rolling by, might perchance open out
other vistas; but for the moment she was content.

Into James Boyd's apartment she had walked, stepping on fleecy clouds
of rapture, to tell him the great news.

She told him the great news.

He said, 'Ah!'

There are many ways of saying 'Ah!' You can put joy, amazement, rapture
into it; you can also make it sound as if it were a reply to a remark
on the weather. James Boyd made it sound just like that. His hair was
rumpled, his brow contracted, and his manner absent. The impression he
gave Elizabeth was that he had barely heard her. The next moment he was
deep in a recital of the misdemeanours of the actors now rehearsing for
his four-act comedy. The star had done this, the leading woman that,
the juvenile something else. For the first time Elizabeth listened
unsympathetically.

The time came when speech failed James Boyd, and he sat back in his
chair, brooding. Elizabeth, cross and wounded, sat in hers, nursing
Joseph. And so, in a dim light, time flowed by.

Just how it happened she never knew. One moment, peace; the next chaos.
One moment stillness; the next, Joseph hurtling through the air, all
claws and expletives, and herself caught in a clasp which shook the
breath from her.

One can dimly reconstruct James's train of thought. He is in despair;
things are going badly at the theatre, and life has lost its savour.
His eye, as he sits, is caught by Elizabeth's profile. It is a
pretty--above all, a soothing--profile. An almost painful
sentimentality sweeps over James Boyd. There she sits, his only friend
in this cruel city. If you argue that there is no necessity to spring
at your only friend and nearly choke her, you argue soundly; the point
is well taken. But James Boyd was beyond the reach of sound argument.
Much rehearsing had frayed his nerves to ribbons. One may say that he
was not responsible for his actions.

That is the case for James. Elizabeth, naturally, was not in a position
to take a wide and understanding view of it. All she knew was that James
had played her false, abused her trust in him. For a moment, such was
the shock of the surprise, she was not conscious of indignation--or,
indeed, of any sensation except the purely physical one of
semi-strangulation. Then, flushed, and more bitterly angry than she
could ever have imagined herself capable of being, she began to
struggle. She tore herself away from him. Coming on top of her
grievance, this thing filled her with a sudden, very vivid hatred of
James. At the back of her anger, feeding it, was the humiliating
thought that it was all her own fault, that by her presence there she
had invited this.

She groped her way to the door. Something was writhing and struggling
inside her, blinding her eyes, and robbing her of speech. She was only
conscious of a desire to be alone, to be back and safe in her own home.
She was aware that he was speaking, but the words did not reach her.
She found the door, and pulled it open. She felt a hand on her arm, but
she shook it off. And then she was back behind her own door, alone and
at liberty to contemplate at leisure the ruins of that little temple of
friendship which she had built up so carefully and in which she had
been so happy.

The broad fact that she would never forgive him was for a while her
only coherent thought. To this succeeded the determination that she
would never forgive herself. And having thus placed beyond the pale the
only two friends she had in New York, she was free to devote herself
without hindrance to the task of feeling thoroughly lonely and
wretched.

The shadows deepened. Across the street a sort of bubbling explosion,
followed by a jerky glare that shot athwart the room, announced the
lighting of the big arc-lamp on the opposite side-walk. She resented
it, being in the mood for undiluted gloom; but she had not the energy
to pull down the shade and shut it out. She sat where she was, thinking
thoughts that hurt.

The door of the apartment opposite opened. There was a single ring at
her bell. She did not answer it. There came another. She sat where she
was, motionless. The door closed again.

       *       *       *       *       *

The days dragged by. Elizabeth lost count of time. Each day had its
duties, which ended when you went to bed; that was all she knew--except
that life had become very grey and very lonely, far lonelier even than
in the time when James Boyd was nothing to her but an occasional sound
of footsteps.

Of James she saw nothing. It is not difficult to avoid anyone in New
York, even when you live just across the way.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Elizabeth's first act each morning, immediately on awaking, to
open her front door and gather in whatever lay outside it. Sometimes
there would be mail; and always, unless Francis, as he sometimes did,
got mixed and absent-minded, the morning milk and the morning paper.

One morning, some two weeks after that evening of which she tried not
to think, Elizabeth, opening the door, found immediately outside it a
folded scrap of paper. She unfolded it.

  _I am just off to the theatre. Won't you wish me luck? I feel sure
  it is going to be a hit. Joseph is purring like a dynamo._--J.R.B.

In the early morning the brain works sluggishly. For an instant
Elizabeth stood looking at the words uncomprehendingly; then, with a
leaping of the heart, their meaning came home to her. He must have left
this at her door on the previous night. The play had been produced! And
somewhere in the folded interior of the morning paper at her feet must
be the opinion of 'One in Authority' concerning it!

Dramatic criticisms have this peculiarity, that if you are looking for
them, they burrow and hide like rabbits. They dodge behind murders;
they duck behind baseball scores; they lie up snugly behind the Wall
Street news. It was a full minute before Elizabeth found what she
sought, and the first words she read smote her like a blow.

In that vein of delightful facetiousness which so endears him to all
followers and perpetrators of the drama, the 'One in Authority' rent
and tore James Boyd's play. He knocked James Boyd's play down, and
kicked it; he jumped on it with large feet; he poured cold water on it,
and chopped it into little bits. He merrily disembowelled James Boyd's
play.

Elizabeth quivered from head to foot. She caught at the door-post to
steady herself. In a flash all her resentment had gone, wiped away and
annihilated like a mist before the sun. She loved him, and she knew now
that she had always loved him.

It took her two seconds to realize that the 'One in Authority' was a
miserable incompetent, incapable of recognizing merit when it was
displayed before him. It took her five minutes to dress. It took her a
minute to run downstairs and out to the news-stand on the corner of the
street. Here, with a lavishness which charmed and exhilarated the
proprietor, she bought all the other papers which he could supply.

Moments of tragedy are best described briefly. Each of the papers
noticed the play, and each of them damned it with uncompromising
heartiness. The criticisms varied only in tone. One cursed with relish
and gusto; another with a certain pity; a third with a kind of wounded
superiority, as of one compelled against his will to speak of something
unspeakable; but the meaning of all was the same. James Boyd's play was
a hideous failure.

Back to the house sped Elizabeth, leaving the organs of a free people
to be gathered up, smoothed, and replaced on the stand by the now more
than ever charmed proprietor. Up the stairs she sped, and arriving
breathlessly at James's door rang the bell.

Heavy footsteps came down the passage; crushed, disheartened footsteps;
footsteps that sent a chill to Elizabeth's heart. The door opened.
James Boyd stood before her, heavy-eyed and haggard. In his eyes was
despair, and on his chin the blue growth of beard of the man from whom
the mailed fist of Fate has smitten the energy to perform his morning
shave.

Behind him, littering the floor, were the morning papers; and at the
sight of them Elizabeth broke down.

'Oh, Jimmy, darling!' she cried; and the next moment she was in his
arms, and for a space time stood still.

How long afterwards it was she never knew; but eventually James Boyd
spoke.

'If you'll marry me,' he said hoarsely, 'I don't care a hang.'

'Jimmy, darling!' said Elizabeth, 'of course I will.'

Past them, as they stood there, a black streak shot silently, and
disappeared out of the door. Joseph was leaving the sinking ship.

'Let him go, the fraud,' said Elizabeth bitterly. 'I shall never
believe in black cats again.'

But James was not of this opinion.

'Joseph has brought me all the luck I need.'

'But the play meant everything to you.'

'It did then.'

Elizabeth hesitated.

'Jimmy, dear, it's all right, you know. I know you will make a fortune
out of your next play, and I've heaps for us both to live on till you
make good. We can manage splendidly on my salary from the _Evening
Chronicle_.'

'What! Have you got a job on a New York paper?'

'Yes, I told you about it. I am doing Heloise Milton. Why, what's the
matter?'

He groaned hollowly.

'And I was thinking that you would come back to Chicago with me!'

'But I will. Of course I will. What did you think I meant to do?'

'What! Give up a real job in New York!' He blinked. 'This isn't really
happening. I'm dreaming.'

'But, Jimmy, are you sure you can get work in Chicago? Wouldn't it be
better to stay on here, where all the managers are, and--'

He shook his head.

'I think it's time I told you about myself,' he said. 'Am I sure I can
get work in Chicago? I am, worse luck. Darling, have you in your more
material moments ever toyed with a Boyd's Premier Breakfast-Sausage or
kept body and soul together with a slice off a Boyd's Excelsior
Home-Cured Ham? My father makes them, and the tragedy of my life is
that he wants me to help him at it. This was my position. I loathed the
family business as much as dad loved it. I had a notion--a fool notion,
as it has turned out--that I could make good in the literary line. I've
scribbled in a sort of way ever since I was in college. When the time
came for me to join the firm, I put it to dad straight. I said, "Give
me a chance, one good, square chance, to see if the divine fire is
really there, or if somebody has just turned on the alarm as a
practical joke." And we made a bargain. I had written this play, and we
made it a test-case. We fixed it up that dad should put up the money to
give it a Broadway production. If it succeeded, all right; I'm the
young Gus Thomas, and may go ahead in the literary game. If it's a
fizzle, off goes my coat, and I abandon pipe-dreams of literary
triumphs and start in as the guy who put the Co. in Boyd & Co. Well,
events have proved that I _am_ the guy, and now I'm going to keep
my part of the bargain just as squarely as dad kept his. I know quite
well that if I refused to play fair and chose to stick on here in New
York and try again, dad would go on staking me. That's the sort of man
he is. But I wouldn't do it for a million Broadway successes. I've had
my chance, and I've foozled; and now I'm going back to make him happy
by being a real live member of the firm. And the queer thing about it
is that last night I hated the idea, and this morning, now that I've
got you, I almost look forward to it.'

He gave a little shiver.

'And yet--I don't know. There's something rather gruesome still to my
near-artist soul in living in luxury on murdered piggies. Have you ever
seen them persuading a pig to play the stellar role in a Boyd Premier
Breakfast-Sausage? It's pretty ghastly. They string them up by their
hind legs, and--b-r-r-r-r!'

'Never mind,' said Elizabeth soothingly. 'Perhaps they don't mind it
really.'

'Well, I don't know,' said James Boyd, doubtfully. 'I've watched them
at it, and I'm bound to say they didn't seem any too well pleased.'

'Try not to think of it.'

'Very well,' said James dutifully.

There came a sudden shout from the floor above, and on the heels of it
a shock-haired youth in pyjamas burst into the apartment.

'Now what?' said James. 'By the way, Miss Herrold, my fiancee; Mr
Briggs--Paul Axworthy Briggs, sometimes known as the Boy Novelist.
What's troubling you, Paul?'

Mr Briggs was stammering with excitement.

'Jimmy,' cried the Boy Novelist, 'what do you think has happened! A
black cat has just come into my apartment. I heard him mewing outside
the door, and opened it, and he streaked in. And I started my new novel
last night! Say, you _do_ believe this thing of black cats
bringing luck, don't you?'

'Luck! My lad, grapple that cat to your soul with hoops of steel. He's
the greatest little luck-bringer in New York. He was boarding with me
till this morning.'

'Then--by Jove! I nearly forgot to ask--your play was a hit? I haven't
seen the papers yet'

'Well, when you see them, don't read the notices. It was the worst
frost Broadway has seen since Columbus's time.'

'But--I don't understand.'

'Don't worry. You don't have to. Go back and fill that cat with fish,
or she'll be leaving you. I suppose you left the door open?'

'My God!' said the Boy Novelist, paling, and dashed for the door.

'Do you think Joseph _will_ bring him luck?' said Elizabeth,
thoughtfully.

'It depends what sort of luck you mean. Joseph seems to work in devious
ways. If I know Joseph's methods, Briggs's new novel will be rejected
by every publisher in the city; and then, when he is sitting in his
apartment, wondering which of his razors to end himself with, there
will be a ring at the bell, and in will come the most beautiful girl in
the world, and then--well, then, take it from me, he will be all
right.'

'He won't mind about the novel?'

'Not in the least.'

'Not even if it means that he will have to go away and kill pigs and
things.'

'About the pig business, dear. I've noticed a slight tendency in you to
let yourself get rather morbid about it. I know they string them up by
the hind-legs, and all that sort of thing; but you must remember that a
pig looks at these things from a different standpoint. My belief is
that the pigs like it. Try not to think of it.'

'Very well,' said Elizabeth, dutifully.




THE ROMANCE OF AN UGLY POLICEMAN


Crossing the Thames by Chelsea Bridge, the wanderer through London
finds himself in pleasant Battersea. Rounding the Park, where the
female of the species wanders with its young by the ornamental water
where the wild-fowl are, he comes upon a vast road. One side of this is
given up to Nature, the other to Intellect. On the right, green trees
stretch into the middle distance; on the left, endless blocks of
residential flats. It is Battersea Park Road, the home of the
cliff-dwellers.

Police-constable Plimmer's beat embraced the first quarter of a mile of
the cliffs. It was his duty to pace in the measured fashion of the
London policeman along the front of them, turn to the right, turn to
the left, and come back along the road which ran behind them. In this
way he was enabled to keep the king's peace over no fewer than four
blocks of mansions.

It did not require a deal of keeping. Battersea may have its tough
citizens, but they do not live in Battersea Park Road. Battersea Park
Road's speciality is Brain, not Crime. Authors, musicians, newspaper
men, actors, and artists are the inhabitants of these mansions. A child
could control them. They assault and batter nothing but pianos; they
steal nothing but ideas; they murder nobody except Chopin and
Beethoven. Not through these shall an ambitious young constable achieve
promotion.

At this conclusion Edward Plimmer arrived within forty-eight hours of
his installation. He recognized the flats for what they were--just so
many layers of big-brained blamelessness. And there was not even the
chance of a burglary. No burglar wastes his time burgling authors.
Constable Plimmer reconciled his mind to the fact that his term in
Battersea must be looked on as something in the nature of a vacation.

He was not altogether sorry. At first, indeed, he found the new
atmosphere soothing. His last beat had been in the heart of tempestuous
Whitechapel, where his arms had ached from the incessant hauling of
wiry inebriates to the station, and his shins had revolted at the kicks
showered upon them by haughty spirits impatient of restraint. Also, one
Saturday night, three friends of a gentleman whom he was trying to
induce not to murder his wife had so wrought upon him that, when he
came out of hospital, his already homely appearance was further marred
by a nose which resembled the gnarled root of a tree. All these things
had taken from the charm of Whitechapel, and the cloistral peace of
Battersea Park Road was grateful and comforting.

And just when the unbroken calm had begun to lose its attraction and
dreams of action were once more troubling him, a new interest entered
his life; and with its coming he ceased to wish to be removed from
Battersea. He fell in love.

It happened at the back of York Mansions. Anything that ever happened,
happened there; for it is at the back of these blocks of flats that the
real life is. At the front you never see anything, except an occasional
tousle-headed young man smoking a pipe; but at the back, where the
cooks come out to parley with the tradesmen, there is at certain hours
of the day quite a respectable activity. Pointed dialogues about
yesterday's eggs and the toughness of Saturday's meat are conducted
_fortissimo_ between cheerful youths in the road and satirical
young women in print dresses, who come out of their kitchen doors on to
little balconies. The whole thing has a pleasing Romeo and Juliet
touch. Romeo rattles up in his cart. 'Sixty-four!' he cries.
'Sixty-fower, sixty-fower, sixty-fow--' The kitchen door opens, and
Juliet emerges. She eyes Romeo without any great show of affection.
'Are you Perkins and Blissett?' she inquires coldly. Romeo admits it.
'Two of them yesterday's eggs was bad.' Romeo protests. He defends his
eggs. They were fresh from the hen; he stood over her while she laid
them. Juliet listens frigidly. 'I _don't_ think,' she says. 'Well,
half of sugar, one marmalade, and two of breakfast bacon,' she adds,
and ends the argument. There is a rattling as of a steamer weighing
anchor; the goods go up in the tradesman's lift; Juliet collects them,
and exits, banging the door. The little drama is over.

Such is life at the back of York Mansions--a busy, throbbing thing.

The peace of afternoon had fallen upon the world one day towards the
end of Constable Plimmer's second week of the simple life, when his
attention was attracted by a whistle. It was followed by a musical
'Hi!'

Constable Plimmer looked up. On the kitchen balcony of a second-floor
flat a girl was standing. As he took her in with a slow and exhaustive
gaze, he was aware of strange thrills. There was something about this
girl which excited Constable Plimmer. I do not say that she was a
beauty; I do not claim that you or I would have raved about her; I
merely say that Constable Plimmer thought she was All Right.

'Miss?' he said.

'Got the time about you?' said the girl. 'All the clocks have stopped.'

'The time,' said Constable Plimmer, consulting his watch, 'wants
exactly ten minutes to four.'

'Thanks.'

'Not at all, miss.'

The girl was inclined for conversation. It was that gracious hour of
the day when you have cleared lunch and haven't got to think of dinner
yet, and have a bit of time to draw a breath or two. She leaned over
the balcony and smiled pleasantly.

'If you want to know the time, ask a pleeceman,' she said. 'You been on
this beat long?'

'Just short of two weeks, miss.'

'I been here three days.'

'I hope you like it, miss.'

'So-so. The milkman's a nice boy.'

Constable Plimmer did not reply. He was busy silently hating the
milkman. He knew him--one of those good-looking blighters; one of those
oiled and curled perishers; one of those blooming fascinators who go
about the world making things hard for ugly, honest men with loving
hearts. Oh, yes, he knew the milkman.

'He's a rare one with his jokes,' said the girl.

Constable Plimmer went on not replying. He was perfectly aware that the
milkman was a rare one with his jokes. He had heard him. The way girls
fell for anyone with the gift of the gab--that was what embittered
Constable Plimmer.

'He--' she giggled. 'He calls me Little Pansy-Face.'

'If you'll excuse me, miss,' said Constable Plimmer coldly, 'I'll have
to be getting along on my beat.'

Little Pansy-Face! And you couldn't arrest him for it! What a world!
Constable Plimmer paced upon his way, a blue-clad volcano.

It is a terrible thing to be obsessed by a milkman. To Constable
Plimmer's disordered imagination it seemed that, dating from this
interview, the world became one solid milkman. Wherever he went, he
seemed to run into this milkman. If he was in the front road, this
milkman--Alf Brooks, it appeared, was his loathsome name--came rattling
past with his jingling cans as if he were Apollo driving his chariot.
If he was round at the back, there was Alf, his damned tenor doing
duets with the balconies. And all this in defiance of the known law of
natural history that milkmen do not come out after five in the morning.
This irritated Constable Plimmer. You talk of a man 'going home with
the milk' when you mean that he sneaks in in the small hours of the
morning. If all milkmen were like Alf Brooks the phrase was
meaningless.

He brooded. The unfairness of Fate was souring him. A man expects
trouble in his affairs of the heart from soldiers and sailors, and to
be cut out by even a postman is to fall before a worthy foe; but
milkmen--no! Only grocers' assistants and telegraph-boys were intended
by Providence to fear milkmen.

Yet here was Alf Brooks, contrary to all rules, the established pet of
the mansions. Bright eyes shone from balconies when his 'Milk--oo--oo'
sounded. Golden voices giggled delightedly at his bellowed chaff. And
Ellen Brown, whom he called Little Pansy-Face, was definitely in love
with him.

They were keeping company. They were walking out. This crushing truth
Edward Plimmer learned from Ellen herself.

She had slipped out to mail a letter at the pillar-box on the corner,
and she reached it just as the policeman arrived there in the course of
his patrol.

Nervousness impelled Constable Plimmer to be arch.

''Ullo, 'ullo, 'ullo,' he said. 'Posting love-letters?'

'What, me? This is to the Police Commissioner, telling him you're no
good.'

'I'll give it to him. Him and me are taking supper tonight.'

Nature had never intended Constable Plimmer to be playful. He was at
his worst when he rollicked. He snatched at the letter with what was
meant to be a debonair gaiety, and only succeeded in looking like an
angry gorilla. The girl uttered a startled squeak.

The letter was addressed to Mr A. Brooks.

Playfulness, after this, was at a discount. The girl was frightened and
angry, and he was scowling with mingled jealousy and dismay.

'Ho!' he said. 'Ho! Mr A. Brooks!'

Ellen Brown was a nice girl, but she had a temper, and there were
moments when her manners lacked rather noticeably the repose which
stamps the caste of Vere de Vere.

'Well, what about it?' she cried. 'Can't one write to the young
gentleman one's keeping company with, without having to get permission
from every--' She paused to marshal her forces from the assault.
'Without having to get permission from every great, ugly, red-faced
copper with big feet and a broken nose in London?'

Constable Plimmer's wrath faded into a dull unhappiness. Yes, she was
right. That was the correct description. That was how an impartial
Scotland Yard would be compelled to describe him, if ever he got lost.
'Missing. A great, ugly, red-faced copper with big feet and a broken
nose.' They would never find him otherwise.

'Perhaps you object to my walking out with Alf? Perhaps you've got
something against him? I suppose you're jealous!'

She threw in the last suggestion entirely in a sporting spirit. She
loved battle, and she had a feeling that this one was going to finish
far too quickly. To prolong it, she gave him this opening. There were a
dozen ways in which he might answer, each more insulting than the last;
and then, when he had finished, she could begin again. These little
encounters, she held, sharpened the wits, stimulated the circulation,
and kept one out in the open air.

'Yes,' said Constable Plimmer.

It was the one reply she was not expecting. For direct abuse, for
sarcasm, for dignity, for almost any speech beginning, 'What! Jealous
of you. Why--' she was prepared. But this was incredible. It disabled
her, as the wild thrust of an unskilled fencer will disable a master of
the rapier. She searched in her mind and found that she had nothing to
say.

There was a tense moment in which she found him, looking her in the
eyes, strangely less ugly than she had supposed, and then he was gone,
rolling along on his beat with that air which all policemen must
achieve, of having no feelings at all, and--as long as it behaves
itself--no interest in the human race.

Ellen posted her letter. She dropped it into the box thoughtfully, and
thoughtfully returned to the flat. She looked over her shoulder, but
Constable Plimmer was out of sight.

Peaceful Battersea began to vex Constable Plimmer. To a man crossed in
love, action is the one anodyne; and Battersea gave no scope for
action. He dreamed now of the old Whitechapel days as a man dreams of
the joys of his childhood. He reflected bitterly that a fellow never
knows when he is well off in this world. Any one of those myriad drunk
and disorderlies would have been as balm to him now. He was like a man
who has run through a fortune and in poverty eats the bread of regret.
Amazedly he recollected that in those happy days he had grumbled at his
lot. He remembered confiding to a friend in the station-house, as he
rubbed with liniment the spot on his right shin where the well-shod
foot of a joyous costermonger had got home, that this sort of
thing--meaning militant costermongers--was 'a bit too thick'. A bit too
thick! Why, he would pay one to kick him now. And as for the three
loyal friends of the would-be wife-murderer who had broken his nose, if
he saw them coming round the corner he would welcome them as brothers.

And Battersea Park Road dozed on--calm, intellectual, law-abiding.

A friend of his told him that there had once been a murder in one of
these flats. He did not believe it. If any of these white-corpuscled
clams ever swatted a fly, it was much as they could do. The thing was
ridiculous on the face of it. If they were capable of murder, they
would have murdered Alf Brooks.

He stood in the road, and looked up at the placid buildings
resentfully.

'Grr-rr-rr!' he growled, and kicked the side-walk.

And, even as he spoke, on the balcony of a second-floor flat there
appeared a woman, an elderly, sharp-faced woman, who waved her arms and
screamed, 'Policeman! Officer! Come up here! Come up here at once!'

Up the stone stairs went Constable Plimmer at the run. His mind was
alert and questioning. Murder? Hardly murder, perhaps. If it had been
that, the woman would have said so. She did not look the sort of woman
who would be reticent about a thing like that. Well, anyway, it was
something; and Edward Plimmer had been long enough in Battersea to be
thankful for small favours. An intoxicated husband would be better than
nothing. At least he would be something that a fellow could get his
hands on to and throw about a bit.

The sharp-faced woman was waiting for him at the door. He followed her
into the flat.

'What is it, ma'am?'

'Theft! Our cook has been stealing!'

She seemed sufficiently excited about it, but Constable Plimmer felt
only depression and disappointment. A stout admirer of the sex, he
hated arresting women. Moreover, to a man in the mood to tackle
anarchists with bombs, to be confronted with petty theft is galling.
But duty was duty. He produced his notebook.

'She is in her room. I locked her in. I know she has taken my brooch.
We have missed money. You must search her.'

'Can't do that, ma'am. Female searcher at the station.'

'Well, you can search her box.'

A little, bald, nervous man in spectacles appeared as if out of a trap.
As a matter of fact, he had been there all the time, standing by the
bookcase; but he was one of those men you do not notice till they move
and speak.

'Er--Jane.'

'Well, Henry?'

The little man seemed to swallow something.

'I--I think that you may possibly be wronging Ellen. It is just
possible, as regards the money--' He smiled in a ghastly manner and
turned to the policeman. 'Er--officer, I ought to tell you that my
wife--ah--holds the purse-strings of our little home; and it is just
possible that in an absent-minded moment _I_ may have--'

'Do you mean to tell me, Henry, that _you_ have been taking my
money?'

'My dear, it is just possible that in the abs--'

'How often?'

He wavered perceptibly. Conscience was beginning to lose its grip.

'Oh, not often.'

'How often? More than once?'

Conscience had shot its bolt. The little man gave up the Struggle.

'No, no, not more than once. Certainly not more than once.'

'You ought not to have done it at all. We will talk about that later.
It doesn't alter the fact that Ellen is a thief. I have missed money
half a dozen times. Besides that, there's the brooch. Step this way,
officer.'

Constable Plimmer stepped that way--his face a mask. He knew who was
waiting for them behind the locked door at the end of the passage. But
it was his duty to look as if he were stuffed, and he did so.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was sitting on her bed, dressed for the street. It was her
afternoon out, the sharp-faced woman had informed Constable Plimmer,
attributing the fact that she had discovered the loss of the brooch in
time to stop her a direct interposition of Providence. She was pale,
and there was a hunted look in her eyes.

'You wicked girl, where is my brooch?'

She held it out without a word. She had been holding it in her hand.

'You see, officer!'

'I wasn't stealing of it. I 'adn't but borrowed it. I was going to put
it back.'

'Stuff and nonsense! Borrow it, indeed! What for?'

'I--I wanted to look nice.'

The woman gave a short laugh. Constable Plimmer's face was a mere block
of wood, expressionless.

'And what about the money I've been missing? I suppose you'll say you
only borrowed that?'

'I never took no money.'

'Well, it's gone, and money doesn't go by itself. Take her to the
police-station, officer.'

Constable Plimmer raised heavy eyes.

'You make a charge, ma'am?'

'Bless the man! Of course I make a charge. What did you think I asked
you to step in for?'

'Will you come along, miss?' said Constable Plimmer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Out in the street the sun shone gaily down on peaceful Battersea. It
was the hour when children walk abroad with their nurses; and from the
green depths of the Park came the sound of happy voices. A cat
stretched itself in the sunshine and eyed the two as they passed with
lazy content.

They walked in silence. Constable Plimmer was a man with a rigid sense
of what was and what was not fitting behaviour in a policeman on duty:
he aimed always at a machine-like impersonality. There were times when
it came hard, but he did his best. He strode on, his chin up and his
eyes averted. And beside him--

Well, she was not crying. That was something.

Round the corner, beautiful in light flannel, gay at both ends with a
new straw hat and the yellowest shoes in South-West London, scented,
curled, a prince among young men, stood Alf Brooks. He was feeling
piqued. When he said three o'clock, he meant three o'clock. It was now
three-fifteen, and she had not appeared. Alf Brooks swore an impatient
oath, and the thought crossed his mind, as it had sometimes crossed it
before, that Ellen Brown was not the only girl in the world.

'Give her another five min--'

Ellen Brown, with escort, at that moment turned the corner.

Rage was the first emotion which the spectacle aroused in Alf Brooks.
Girls who kept a fellow waiting about while they fooled around with
policemen were no girls for him. They could understand once and for all
that he was a man who could pick and choose.

And then an electric shock set the world dancing mistily before his
eyes. This policeman was wearing his belt; he was on duty. And Ellen's
face was not the face of a girl strolling with the Force for pleasure.

His heart stopped, and then began to race. His cheeks flushed a dusky
crimson. His jaw fell, and a prickly warmth glowed in the parts about
his spine.

'Goo'!'

His fingers sought his collar.

'Crumbs!'

He was hot all over.

'Goo' Lor'! She's been pinched!'

He tugged at his collar. It was choking him.

Alf Brooks did not show up well in the first real crisis which life had
forced upon him. That must be admitted. Later, when it was over, and he
had leisure for self-examination, he admitted it to himself. But even
then he excused himself by asking Space in a blustering manner what
else he could ha' done. And if the question did not bring much balm to
his soul at the first time of asking, it proved wonderfully soothing on
constant repetition. He repeated it at intervals for the next two days,
and by the end of that time his cure was complete. On the third morning
his 'Milk--oo--oo' had regained its customary carefree ring, and he was
feeling that he had acted in difficult circumstances in the only
possible manner.

Consider. He was Alf Brooks, well known and respected in the
neighbourhood; a singer in the choir on Sundays; owner of a milk-walk
in the most fashionable part of Battersea; to all practical purposes a
public man. Was he to recognize, in broad daylight and in open street,
a girl who walked with a policeman because she had to, a malefactor, a
girl who had been pinched?

Ellen, Constable Plimmer woodenly at her side, came towards him. She
was ten yards off--seven--five--three--Alf Brooks tilted his hat over
his eyes and walked past her, unseeing, a stranger.

He hurried on. He was conscious of a curious feeling that somebody was
just going to kick him, but he dared not look round.

       *       *       *       *       *

Constable Plimmer eyed the middle distance with an earnest gaze. His
face was redder than ever. Beneath his blue tunic strange emotions were
at work. Something seemed to be filling his throat. He tried to swallow
it.

He stopped in his stride. The girl glanced up at him in a kind of dull,
questioning way. Their eyes met for the first time that afternoon, and
it seemed to Constable Plimmer that whatever it was that was
interfering with the inside of his throat had grown larger, and more
unmanageable.

There was the misery of the stricken animal in her gaze. He had seen
women look like that in Whitechapel. The woman to whom, indirectly, he
owed his broken nose had looked like that. As his hand had fallen on
the collar of the man who was kicking her to death, he had seen her
eyes. They were Ellen's eyes, as she stood there now--tortured,
crushed, yet uncomplaining.

Constable Plimmer looked at Ellen, and Ellen looked at Constable
Plimmer. Down the street some children were playing with a dog. In one
of the flats a woman began to sing.

'Hop it,' said Constable Plimmer.

He spoke gruffly. He found speech difficult.

The girl started.

'What say?'

'Hop it. Get along. Run away.'

'What do you mean?'

Constable Plimmer scowled. His face was scarlet. His jaw protruded like
a granite break-water.

'Go on,' he growled. 'Hop it. Tell him it was all a joke. I'll explain
at the station.'

Understanding seemed to come to her slowly.

'Do you mean I'm to go?'

'Yes.'

'What do you mean? You aren't going to take me to the station?'

'No.'

She stared at him. Then, suddenly, she broke down,

'He wouldn't look at me. He was ashamed of me. He pretended not to see
me.'

She leaned against the wall, her back shaking.

'Well, run after him, and tell him it was all--'

'No, no, no.'

Constable Plimmer looked morosely at the side-walk. He kicked it.

She turned. Her eyes were red, but she was no longer crying. Her chin
had a brave tilt.

'I couldn't--not after what he did. Let's go along. I--I don't care.'

She looked at him curiously.

'Were you really going to have let me go?'

Constable Plimmer nodded. He was aware of her eyes searching his face,
but he did not meet them.

'Why?'

He did not answer.

'What would have happened to you, if you had have done?'

Constable Plimmer's scowl was of the stuff of which nightmares are
made. He kicked the unoffending side-walk with an increased
viciousness.

'Dismissed the Force,' he said curtly.

'And sent to prison, too, I shouldn't wonder.'

'Maybe.'

He heard her draw a deep breath, and silence fell upon them again. The
dog down the road had stopped barking. The woman in the flat had
stopped singing. They were curiously alone.

'Would you have done all that for me?' she said.

'Yes.'

'Why?'

'Because I don't think you ever did it. Stole that money, I mean. Nor
the brooch, neither.'

'Was that all?'

'What do you mean--all?'

'Was that the only reason?'

He swung round on her, almost threateningly.

'No,' he said hoarsely. 'No, it wasn't, and you know it wasn't. Well,
if you want it, you can have it. It was because I love you. There! Now
I've said it, and now you can go on and laugh at me as much as you
want.'

'I'm not laughing,' she said soberly.

'You think I'm a fool!'

'No, I don't.'

'I'm nothing to you. _He's_ the fellow you're stuck on.'

She gave a little shudder.

'No.'

'What do you mean?'

'I've changed.' She paused. 'I think I shall have changed more by the
time I come out.'

'Come out?'

'Come out of prison.'

'You're not going to prison.'

'Yes, I am.'

'I won't take you.'

'Yes, you will. Think I'm going to let you get yourself in trouble like
that, to get me out of a fix? Not much.'

'You hop it, like a good girl.'

'Not me.'

He stood looking at her like a puzzled bear.

'They can't eat me.'

'They'll cut off all of your hair.'

'D'you like my hair?'

'Yes.'

'Well, it'll grow again.'

'Don't stand talking. Hop it.'

'I won't. Where's the station?'

'Next street.'

'Well, come along, then.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The blue glass lamp of the police-station came into sight, and for an
instant she stopped. Then she was walking on again, her chin tilted.
But her voice shook a little as she spoke.

'Nearly there. Next stop, Battersea. All change! I say, mister--I don't
know your name.'

'Plimmer's my name, miss. Edward Plimmer.'

'I wonder if--I mean it'll be pretty lonely where I'm going--I wonder
if--What I mean is, it would be rather a lark, when I come out, if I
was to find a pal waiting for me to say "Hallo".'

Constable Plimmer braced his ample feet against the stones, and turned
purple.

'Miss,' he said, 'I'll be there, if I have to sit up all night. The
first thing you'll see when they open the doors is a great, ugly,
red-faced copper with big feet and a broken nose. And if you'll say
"Hallo" to him when he says "Hallo" to you, he'll be as pleased as
Punch and as proud as a duke. And, miss'--he clenched his hands till
the nails hurt the leathern flesh--'and, miss, there's just one thing
more I'd like to say. You'll be having a good deal of time to yourself
for awhile; you'll be able to do a good bit of thinking without anyone
to disturb you; and what I'd like you to give your mind to, if you
don't object, is just to think whether you can't forget that
narrow-chested, God-forsaken blighter who treated you so mean, and get
half-way fond of someone who knows jolly well you're the only girl
there is.'

She looked past him at the lamp which hung, blue and forbidding, over
the station door.

'How long'll I get?' she said. 'What will they give me? Thirty days?'

He nodded.

'It won't take me as long as that,' she said. 'I say, what do people
call you?--people who are fond of you, I mean?--Eddie or Ted?'




A SEA OF TROUBLES


Mr Meggs's mind was made up. He was going to commit suicide.

There had been moments, in the interval which had elapsed between the
first inception of the idea and his present state of fixed
determination, when he had wavered. In these moments he had debated,
with Hamlet, the question whether it was nobler in the mind to suffer,
or to take arms against a sea of troubles and by opposing end them. But
all that was over now. He was resolved.

Mr Meggs's point, the main plank, as it were, in his suicidal platform,
was that with him it was beside the question whether or not it was
nobler to suffer in the mind. The mind hardly entered into it at all.
What he had to decide was whether it was worth while putting up any
longer with the perfectly infernal pain in his stomach. For Mr Meggs
was a martyr to indigestion. As he was also devoted to the pleasures of
the table, life had become for him one long battle, in which, whatever
happened, he always got the worst of it.

He was sick of it. He looked back down the vista of the years, and
found therein no hope for the future. One after the other all the
patent medicines in creation had failed him. Smith's Supreme Digestive
Pellets--he had given them a more than fair trial. Blenkinsop's Liquid
Life-Giver--he had drunk enough of it to float a ship. Perkins's
Premier Pain-Preventer, strongly recommended by the sword-swallowing
lady at Barnum and Bailey's--he had wallowed in it. And so on down the
list. His interior organism had simply sneered at the lot of them.

'Death, where is thy sting?' thought Mr Meggs, and forthwith began to
make his preparations.

Those who have studied the matter say that the tendency to commit
suicide is greatest among those who have passed their fifty-fifth year,
and that the rate is twice as great for unoccupied males as for
occupied males. Unhappy Mr Meggs, accordingly, got it, so to speak,
with both barrels. He was fifty-six, and he was perhaps the most
unoccupied adult to be found in the length and breadth of the United
Kingdom. He toiled not, neither did he spin. Twenty years before, an
unexpected legacy had placed him in a position to indulge a natural
taste for idleness to the utmost. He was at that time, as regards his
professional life, a clerk in a rather obscure shipping firm. Out of
office hours he had a mild fondness for letters, which took the form of
meaning to read right through the hundred best books one day, but
actually contenting himself with the daily paper and an occasional
magazine.

Such was Mr Meggs at thirty-six. The necessity for working for a living
and a salary too small to permit of self-indulgence among the more
expensive and deleterious dishes on the bill of fare had up to that
time kept his digestion within reasonable bounds. Sometimes he had
twinges; more often he had none.

Then came the legacy, and with it Mr Meggs let himself go. He left
London and retired to his native village, where, with a French cook and
a series of secretaries to whom he dictated at long intervals
occasional paragraphs of a book on British Butterflies on which he
imagined himself to be at work, he passed the next twenty years. He
could afford to do himself well, and he did himself extremely well.
Nobody urged him to take exercise, so he took no exercise. Nobody
warned him of the perils of lobster and welsh rabbits to a man of
sedentary habits, for it was nobody's business to warn him. On the
contrary, people rather encouraged the lobster side of his character,
for he was a hospitable soul and liked to have his friends dine with
him. The result was that Nature, as is her wont, laid for him, and got
him. It seemed to Mr Meggs that he woke one morning to find himself a
chronic dyspeptic. That was one of the hardships of his position, to
his mind. The thing seemed to hit him suddenly out of a blue sky. One
moment, all appeared to be peace and joy; the next, a lively and
irritable wild-cat with red-hot claws seemed somehow to have introduced
itself into his interior.

So Mr Meggs decided to end it.

In this crisis of his life the old methodical habits of his youth
returned to him. A man cannot be a clerk in even an obscure firm of
shippers for a great length of time without acquiring system, and Mr
Meggs made his preparations calmly and with a forethought worthy of a
better cause.

And so we find him, one glorious June morning, seated at his desk,
ready for the end.

Outside, the sun beat down upon the orderly streets of the village.
Dogs dozed in the warm dust. Men who had to work went about their toil
moistly, their minds far away in shady public-houses.

But Mr Meggs, in his study, was cool both in mind and body.

Before him, on the desk, lay six little slips of paper. They were
bank-notes, and they represented, with the exception of a few pounds,
his entire worldly wealth. Beside them were six letters, six envelopes,
and six postage stamps. Mr Meggs surveyed them calmly.

He would not have admitted it, but he had had a lot of fun writing
those letters. The deliberation as to who should be his heirs had
occupied him pleasantly for several days, and, indeed, had taken his
mind off his internal pains at times so thoroughly that he had
frequently surprised himself in an almost cheerful mood. Yes, he would
have denied it, but it had been great sport sitting in his arm-chair,
thinking whom he should pick out from England's teeming millions to
make happy with his money. All sorts of schemes had passed through his
mind. He had a sense of power which the mere possession of the money
had never given him. He began to understand why millionaires make freak
wills. At one time he had toyed with the idea of selecting someone at
random from the London Directory and bestowing on him all he had to
bequeath. He had only abandoned the scheme when it occurred to him that
he himself would not be in a position to witness the recipient's
stunned delight. And what was the good of starting a thing like that,
if you were not to be in at the finish?

Sentiment succeeded whimsicality. His old friends of the office--those
were the men to benefit. What good fellows they had been! Some were
dead, but he still kept intermittently in touch with half a dozen of
them. And--an important point--he knew their present addresses.

This point was important, because Mr Meggs had decided not to leave a
will, but to send the money direct to the beneficiaries. He knew what
wills were. Even in quite straightforward circumstances they often made
trouble. There had been some slight complication about his own legacy
twenty years ago. Somebody had contested the will, and before the thing
was satisfactorily settled the lawyers had got away with about twenty
per cent of the whole. No, no wills. If he made one, and then killed
himself, it might be upset on a plea of insanity. He knew of no
relative who might consider himself entitled to the money, but there
was the chance that some remote cousin existed; and then the comrades
of his youth might fail to collect after all.

He declined to run the risk. Quietly and by degrees he had sold out the
stocks and shares in which his fortune was invested, and deposited the
money in his London bank. Six piles of large notes, dividing the total
into six equal parts; six letters couched in a strain of reminiscent
pathos and manly resignation; six envelopes, legibly addressed; six
postage-stamps; and that part of his preparations was complete. He
licked the stamps and placed them on the envelopes; took the notes and
inserted them in the letters; folded the letters and thrust them into
the envelopes; sealed the envelopes; and unlocking the drawer of his
desk produced a small, black, ugly-looking bottle.

He opened the bottle and poured the contents into a medicine-glass.

It had not been without considerable thought that Mr Meggs had decided
upon the method of his suicide. The knife, the pistol, the rope--they
had all presented their charms to him. He had further examined the
merits of drowning and of leaping to destruction from a height.

There were flaws in each. Either they were painful, or else they were
messy. Mr Meggs had a tidy soul, and he revolted from the thought of
spoiling his figure, as he would most certainly do if he drowned
himself; or the carpet, as he would if he used the pistol; or the
pavement--and possibly some innocent pedestrian, as must infallibly
occur should he leap off the Monument. The knife was out of the
question. Instinct told him that it would hurt like the very dickens.

No; poison was the thing. Easy to take, quick to work, and on the whole
rather agreeable than otherwise.

Mr Meggs hid the glass behind the inkpot and rang the bell.

'Has Miss Pillenger arrived?' he inquired of the servant.

'She has just come, sir.'

'Tell her that I am waiting for her here.'

Jane Pillenger was an institution. Her official position was that of
private secretary and typist to Mr Meggs. That is to say, on the rare
occasions when Mr Meggs's conscience overcame his indolence to the
extent of forcing him to resume work on his British Butterflies, it was
to Miss Pillenger that he addressed the few rambling and incoherent
remarks which constituted his idea of a regular hard, slogging spell of
literary composition. When he sank back in his chair, speechless and
exhausted like a Marathon runner who has started his sprint a mile or
two too soon, it was Miss Pillenger's task to unscramble her shorthand
notes, type them neatly, and place them in their special drawer in the
desk.

Miss Pillenger was a wary spinster of austere views, uncertain age, and
a deep-rooted suspicion of men--a suspicion which, to do an abused sex
justice, they had done nothing to foster. Men had always been almost
coldly correct in their dealings with Miss Pillenger. In her twenty
years of experience as a typist and secretary she had never had to
refuse with scorn and indignation so much as a box of chocolates from
any of her employers. Nevertheless, she continued to be icily on her
guard. The clenched fist of her dignity was always drawn back, ready to
swing on the first male who dared to step beyond the bounds of
professional civility.

Such was Miss Pillenger. She was the last of a long line of unprotected
English girlhood which had been compelled by straitened circumstances
to listen for hire to the appallingly dreary nonsense which Mr Meggs
had to impart on the subject of British Butterflies. Girls had come,
and girls had gone, blondes, ex-blondes, brunettes, ex-brunettes,
near-blondes, near-brunettes; they had come buoyant, full of hope and
life, tempted by the lavish salary which Mr Meggs had found himself
after a while compelled to pay; and they had dropped off, one after
another, like exhausted bivalves, unable to endure the crushing boredom
of life in the village which had given Mr Meggs to the world. For Mr
Meggs's home-town was no City of Pleasure. Remove the Vicar's
magic-lantern and the try-your-weight machine opposite the post office,
and you practically eliminated the temptations to tread the primrose
path. The only young men in the place were silent, gaping youths, at
whom lunacy commissioners looked sharply and suspiciously when they
met. The tango was unknown, and the one-step. The only form of dance
extant--and that only at the rarest intervals--was a sort of polka not
unlike the movements of a slightly inebriated boxing kangaroo. Mr
Meggs's secretaries and typists gave the town one startled, horrified
glance, and stampeded for London like frightened ponies.

Not so Miss Pillenger. She remained. She was a business woman, and it
was enough for her that she received a good salary. For five pounds a
week she would have undertaken a post as secretary and typist to a
Polar Expedition. For six years she had been with Mr Meggs, and
doubtless she looked forward to being with him at least six years more.

Perhaps it was the pathos of this thought which touched Mr Meggs, as
she sailed, notebook in hand, through the doorway of the study. Here,
he told himself, was a confiding girl, all unconscious of impending
doom, relying on him as a daughter relies on her father. He was glad
that he had not forgotten Miss Pillenger when he was making his
preparations.

He had certainly not forgotten Miss Pillenger. On his desk beside the
letters lay a little pile of notes, amounting in all to five hundred
pounds--her legacy.

Miss Pillenger was always business-like. She sat down in her chair,
opened her notebook, moistened her pencil, and waited expectantly for
Mr Meggs to clear his throat and begin work on the butterflies. She was
surprised when, instead of frowning, as was his invariable practice
when bracing himself for composition, he bestowed upon her a sweet,
slow smile.

All that was maidenly and defensive in Miss Pillenger leaped to arms
under that smile. It ran in and out among her nerve-centres. It had
been long in arriving, this moment of crisis, but here it undoubtedly
was at last. After twenty years an employer was going to court disaster
by trying to flirt with her.

Mr Meggs went on smiling. You cannot classify smiles. Nothing lends
itself so much to a variety of interpretations as a smile. Mr Meggs
thought he was smiling the sad, tender smile of a man who, knowing
himself to be on the brink of the tomb, bids farewell to a faithful
employee. Miss Pillenger's view was that he was smiling like an
abandoned old rip who ought to have been ashamed of himself.

'No, Miss Pillenger,' said Mr Meggs, 'I shall not work this morning. I
shall want you, if you will be so good, to post these six letters for
me.'

Miss Pillenger took the letters. Mr Meggs surveyed her tenderly.

'Miss Pillenger, you have been with me a long time now. Six years, is
it not? Six years. Well, well. I don't think I have ever made you a
little present, have I?'

'You give me a good salary.'

'Yes, but I want to give you something more. Six years is a long time.
I have come to regard you with a different feeling from that which the
ordinary employer feels for his secretary. You and I have worked
together for six long years. Surely I may be permitted to give you some
token of my appreciation of your fidelity.' He took the pile of notes.
'These are for you, Miss Pillenger.'

He rose and handed them to her. He eyed her for a moment with all the
sentimentality of a man whose digestion has been out of order for over
two decades. The pathos of the situation swept him away. He bent over
Miss Pillenger, and kissed her on the forehead.

Smiles excepted, there is nothing so hard to classify as a kiss. Mr
Meggs's notion was that he kissed Miss Pillenger much as some great
general, wounded unto death, might have kissed his mother, his sister,
or some particularly sympathetic aunt; Miss Pillenger's view, differing
substantially from this, may be outlined in her own words.

'Ah!' she cried, as, dealing Mr Meggs's conveniently placed jaw a blow
which, had it landed an inch lower down, might have knocked him out,
she sprang to her feet. 'How dare you! I've been waiting for this Mr
Meggs. I have seen it in your eye. I have expected it. Let me tell you
that I am not at all the sort of girl with whom it is safe to behave
like that. I can protect myself. I am only a working-girl--'

Mr Meggs, who had fallen back against the desk as a stricken pugilist
falls on the ropes, pulled himself together to protest.

'Miss Pillenger,' he cried, aghast, 'you misunderstand me. I had no
intention--'

'Misunderstand you? Bah! I am only a working-girl--'

'Nothing was farther from my mind--'

'Indeed! Nothing was farther from your mind! You give me money, you
shower your vile kisses on me, but nothing was farther from your mind
than the obvious interpretation of such behaviour!' Before coming to Mr
Meggs, Miss Pillenger had been secretary to an Indiana novelist. She
had learned style from the master. 'Now that you have gone too far, you
are frightened at what you have done. You well may be, Mr Meggs. I am
only a working-girl--'

'Miss Pillenger, I implore you--'

'Silence! I am only a working-girl--'

A wave of mad fury swept over Mr Meggs. The shock of the blow and still
more of the frightful ingratitude of this horrible woman nearly made
him foam at the mouth.

'Don't keep on saying you're only a working-girl,' he bellowed. 'You'll
drive me mad. Go. Go away from me. Get out. Go anywhere, but leave me
alone!'

Miss Pillenger was not entirely sorry to obey the request. Mr Meggs's
sudden fury had startled and frightened her. So long as she could end
the scene victorious, she was anxious to withdraw.

'Yes, I will go,' she said, with dignity, as she opened the door. 'Now
that you have revealed yourself in your true colours, Mr Meggs, this
house is no fit place for a wor--'

She caught her employer's eye, and vanished hastily.

Mr Meggs paced the room in a ferment. He had been shaken to his core by
the scene. He boiled with indignation. That his kind thoughts should
have been so misinterpreted--it was too much. Of all ungrateful worlds,
this world was the most--

He stopped suddenly in his stride, partly because his shin had struck a
chair, partly because an idea had struck his mind.

Hopping madly, he added one more parallel between himself and Hamlet by
soliloquizing aloud.

'I'll be hanged if I commit suicide,' he yelled.

And as he spoke the words a curious peace fell on him, as on a man who
has awakened from a nightmare. He sat down at the desk. What an idiot
he had been ever to contemplate self-destruction. What could have
induced him to do it? By his own hand to remove himself, merely in
order that a pack of ungrateful brutes might wallow in his money--it
was the scheme of a perfect fool.

He wouldn't commit suicide. Not if he knew it. He would stick on and
laugh at them. And if he did have an occasional pain inside, what of
that? Napoleon had them, and look at him. He would be blowed if he
committed suicide.

With the fire of a new resolve lighting up his eyes, he turned to seize
the six letters and rifle them of their contents.

They were gone.

It took Mr Meggs perhaps thirty seconds to recollect where they had
gone to, and then it all came back to him. He had given them to the
demon Pillenger, and, if he did not overtake her and get them back, she
would mail them.

Of all the mixed thoughts which seethed in Mr Meggs's mind at that
moment, easily the most prominent was the reflection that from his
front door to the post office was a walk of less than five minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Pillenger walked down the sleepy street in the June sunshine,
boiling, as Mr Meggs had done, with indignation. She, too, had been
shaken to the core. It was her intention to fulfil her duty by posting
the letters which had been entrusted to her, and then to quit for ever
the service of one who, for six years a model employer, had at last
forgotten himself and showed his true nature.

Her meditations were interrupted by a hoarse shout in her rear; and,
turning, she perceived the model employer running rapidly towards her.
His face was scarlet, his eyes wild, and he wore no hat.

Miss Pillenger's mind worked swiftly. She took in the situation in a
flash. Unrequited, guilty love had sapped Mr Meggs's reason, and she
was to be the victim of his fury. She had read of scores of similar
cases in the newspapers. How little she had ever imagined that she
would be the heroine of one of these dramas of passion.

She looked for one brief instant up and down the street. Nobody was in
sight. With a loud cry she began to run.

'Stop!'

It was the fierce voice of her pursuer. Miss Pillenger increased to
third speed. As she did so, she had a vision of headlines.

'Stop!' roared Mr Meggs.

'UNREQUITED PASSION MADE THIS MAN MURDERER,' thought Miss Pillenger.

'Stop!'

'CRAZED WITH LOVE HE SLAYS BEAUTIFUL BLONDE,' flashed out in letters of
crimson on the back of Miss Pillenger's mind.

'Stop!'

'SPURNED, HE STABS HER THRICE.'

To touch the ground at intervals of twenty yards or so--that was the
ideal she strove after. She addressed herself to it with all the
strength of her powerful mind.

In London, New York, Paris, and other cities where life is brisk, the
spectacle of a hatless gentleman with a purple face pursuing his
secretary through the streets at a rapid gallop would, of course, have
excited little, if any, remark. But in Mr Meggs's home-town events were
of rarer occurrence. The last milestone in the history of his native
place had been the visit, two years before, of Bingley's Stupendous
Circus, which had paraded along the main street on its way to the next
town, while zealous members of its staff visited the back premises of
the houses and removed all the washing from the lines. Since then deep
peace had reigned.

Gradually, therefore, as the chase warmed up, citizens of all shapes
and sizes began to assemble. Miss Pillenger's screams and the general
appearance of Mr Meggs gave food for thought. Having brooded over the
situation, they decided at length to take a hand, with the result that
as Mr Meggs's grasp fell upon Miss Pillenger the grasp of several of
his fellow-townsmen fell upon him.

'Save me!' said Miss Pillenger.

Mr Meggs pointed speechlessly to the letters, which she still grasped
in her right hand. He had taken practically no exercise for twenty
years, and the pace had told upon him.

Constable Gooch, guardian of the town's welfare, tightened his hold on
Mr Meggs's arm, and desired explanations.

'He--he was going to murder me,' said Miss Pillenger.

'Kill him,' advised an austere bystander.

'What do you mean you were going to murder the lady?' inquired
Constable Gooch.

Mr Meggs found speech.

'I--I--I--I only wanted those letters.'

'What for?'

'They're mine.'

'You charge her with stealing 'em?'

'He gave them me to post with his own hands,' cried Miss Pillenger.

'I know I did, but I want them back.'

By this time the constable, though age had to some extent dimmed his
sight, had recognized beneath the perspiration, features which, though
they were distorted, were nevertheless those of one whom he respected
as a leading citizen.

'Why, Mr Meggs!' he said.

This identification by one in authority calmed, if it a little
disappointed, the crowd. What it was they did not know, but, it was
apparently not a murder, and they began to drift off.

'Why don't you give Mr Meggs his letters when he asks you, ma'am?' said
the constable.

Miss Pillenger drew herself up haughtily.

'Here are your letters, Mr Meggs, I hope we shall never meet again.'

Mr Meggs nodded. That was his view, too.

All things work together for good. The following morning Mr Meggs awoke
from a dreamless sleep with a feeling that some curious change had
taken place in him. He was abominably stiff, and to move his limbs was
pain, but down in the centre of his being there was a novel sensation
of lightness. He could have declared that he was happy.

Wincing, he dragged himself out of bed and limped to the window. He
threw it open. It was a perfect morning. A cool breeze smote his face,
bringing with it pleasant scents and the soothing sound of God's
creatures beginning a new day.

An astounding thought struck him.

'Why, I feel well!'

Then another.

'It must be the exercise I took yesterday. By George, I'll do it
regularly.'

He drank in the air luxuriously. Inside him, the wild-cat gave him a
sudden claw, but it was a half-hearted effort, the effort of one who
knows that he is beaten. Mr Meggs was so absorbed in his thoughts that
he did not even notice it.

'London,' he was saying to himself. 'One of these physical culture
places.... Comparatively young man.... Put myself in their hands....
Mild, regular exercise....'

He limped to the bathroom.




THE MAN WITH TWO LEFT FEET


Students of the folk-lore of the United States of America are no doubt
familiar with the quaint old story of Clarence MacFadden. Clarence
MacFadden, it seems, was 'wishful to dance, but his feet wasn't gaited
that way. So he sought a professor and asked him his price, and said he
was willing to pay. The professor' (the legend goes on) 'looked down
with alarm at his feet and marked their enormous expanse; and he tacked
on a five to his regular price for teaching MacFadden to dance.'

I have often been struck by the close similarity between the case of
Clarence and that of Henry Wallace Mills. One difference alone presents
itself. It would seem to have been mere vanity and ambition that
stimulated the former; whereas the motive force which drove Henry Mills
to defy Nature and attempt dancing was the purer one of love. He did it
to please his wife. Had he never gone to Ye Bonnie Briar-Bush Farm,
that popular holiday resort, and there met Minnie Hill, he would
doubtless have continued to spend in peaceful reading the hours not
given over to work at the New York bank at which he was employed as
paying-cashier. For Henry was a voracious reader. His idea of a
pleasant evening was to get back to his little flat, take off his coat,
put on his slippers, light a pipe, and go on from the point where he
had left off the night before in his perusal of the BIS-CAL volume of
the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_--making notes as he read in a stout
notebook. He read the BIS-CAL volume because, after many days, he had
finished the A-AND, AND-AUS, and the AUS-BIS. There was something
admirable--and yet a little horrible--about Henry's method of study. He
went after Learning with the cold and dispassionate relentlessness of a
stoat pursuing a rabbit. The ordinary man who is paying instalments on
the _Encyclopaedia Britannica_ is apt to get over-excited and to
skip impatiently to Volume XXVIII (VET-ZYM) to see how it all comes out
in the end. Not so Henry. His was not a frivolous mind. He intended to
read the _Encyclopaedia_ through, and he was not going to spoil
his pleasure by peeping ahead.

It would seem to be an inexorable law of Nature that no man shall shine
at both ends. If he has a high forehead and a thirst for wisdom, his
fox-trotting (if any) shall be as the staggerings of the drunken;
while, if he is a good dancer, he is nearly always petrified from the
ears upward. No better examples of this law could have been found than
Henry Mills and his fellow-cashier, Sidney Mercer. In New York banks
paying-cashiers, like bears, tigers, lions, and other fauna, are always
shut up in a cage in pairs, and are consequently dependent on each
other for entertainment and social intercourse when business is slack.
Henry Mills and Sidney simply could not find a subject in common.
Sidney knew absolutely nothing of even such elementary things as Abana,
Aberration, Abraham, or Acrogenae; while Henry, on his side, was
scarcely aware that there had been any developments in the dance since
the polka. It was a relief to Henry when Sidney threw up his job to
join the chorus of a musical comedy, and was succeeded by a man who,
though full of limitations, could at least converse intelligently on
Bowls.

Such, then, was Henry Wallace Mills. He was in the middle thirties,
temperate, studious, a moderate smoker, and--one would have said--a
bachelor of the bachelors, armour-plated against Cupid's well-meant but
obsolete artillery. Sometimes Sidney Mercer's successor in the teller's
cage, a sentimental young man, would broach the topic of Woman and
Marriage. He would ask Henry if he ever intended to get married. On
such occasions Henry would look at him in a manner which was a blend of
scorn, amusement, and indignation; and would reply with a single word:

'Me!'

It was the way he said it that impressed you.

But Henry had yet to experience the unmanning atmosphere of a lonely
summer resort. He had only just reached the position in the bank where
he was permitted to take his annual vacation in the summer. Hitherto he
had always been released from his cage during the winter months, and
had spent his ten days of freedom at his flat, with a book in his hand
and his feet on the radiator. But the summer after Sidney Mercer's
departure they unleashed him in August.

It was meltingly warm in the city. Something in Henry cried out for the
country. For a month before the beginning of his vacation he devoted
much of the time that should have been given to the _Encyclopaedia
Britannica_ in reading summer-resort literature. He decided at
length upon Ye Bonnie Briar-Bush Farm because the advertisements spoke
so well of it.

Ye Bonnie Briar-Bush Farm was a rather battered frame building many
miles from anywhere. Its attractions included a Lovers' Leap, a Grotto,
golf-links--a five-hole course where the enthusiast found unusual
hazards in the shape of a number of goats tethered at intervals between
the holes--and a silvery lake, only portions of which were used as a
dumping-ground for tin cans and wooden boxes. It was all new and
strange to Henry and caused him an odd exhilaration. Something of
gaiety and reckless abandon began to creep into his veins. He had a
curious feeling that in these romantic surroundings some adventure
ought to happen to him.

At this juncture Minnie Hill arrived. She was a small, slim girl,
thinner and paler than she should have been, with large eyes that
seemed to Henry pathetic and stirred his chivalry. He began to think a
good deal about Minnie Hill.

And then one evening he met her on the shores of the silvery lake. He
was standing there, slapping at things that looked like mosquitoes, but
could not have been, for the advertisements expressly stated that none
were ever found in the neighbourhood of Ye Bonnie Briar-Bush Farm, when
along she came. She walked slowly, as if she were tired. A strange
thrill, half of pity, half of something else, ran through Henry. He
looked at her. She looked at him.

'Good evening,' he said.

They were the first words he had spoken to her. She never contributed
to the dialogue of the dining-room, and he had been too shy to seek her
out in the open.

She said 'Good evening,' too, tying the score. And there was silence
for a moment.

Commiseration overcame Henry's shyness.

'You're looking tired,' he said.

'I feel tired.' She paused. 'I overdid it in the city.'

'It?'

'Dancing.'

'Oh, dancing. Did you dance much?'

'Yes; a great deal.'

'Ah!'

A promising, even a dashing start. But how to continue? For the first
time Henry regretted the steady determination of his methods with the
_Encyclopaedia_. How pleasant if he could have been in a position
to talk easily of Dancing. Then memory reminded him that, though he had
not yet got up to Dancing, it was only a few weeks before that he had
been reading of the Ballet.

'I don't dance myself,' he said, 'but I am fond of reading about it.
Did you know that the word "ballet" incorporated three distinct modern
words, "ballet", "ball", and "ballad", and that ballet-dancing was
originally accompanied by singing?'

It hit her. It had her weak. She looked at him with awe in her eyes.
One might almost say that she gaped at Henry.

'I hardly know anything,' she said.

'The first descriptive ballet seen in London, England,' said Henry,
quietly, 'was "The Tavern Bilkers", which was played at Drury Lane
in--in seventeen--something.'

'Was it?'

'And the earliest modern ballet on record was that given by--by someone
to celebrate the marriage of the Duke of Milan in 1489.'

There was no doubt or hesitation about the date this time. It was
grappled to his memory by hoops of steel owing to the singular
coincidence of it being also his telephone number. He gave it out with
a roll, and the girl's eyes widened.

'What an awful lot you know!'

'Oh, no,' said Henry, modestly. 'I read a great deal.'

'It must be splendid to know a lot,' she said, wistfully. 'I've never
had time for reading. I've always wanted to. I think you're wonderful!'

Henry's soul was expanding like a flower and purring like a
well-tickled cat. Never in his life had he been admired by a woman. The
sensation was intoxicating.

Silence fell upon them. They started to walk back to the farm, warned
by the distant ringing of a bell that supper was about to materialize.
It was not a musical bell, but distance and the magic of this unusual
moment lent it charm. The sun was setting. It threw a crimson carpet
across the silvery lake. The air was very still. The creatures,
unclassified by science, who might have been mistaken for mosquitoes
had their presence been possible at Ye Bonnie Briar-Bush Farm, were
biting harder than ever. But Henry heeded them not. He did not even
slap at them. They drank their fill of his blood and went away to put
their friends on to this good thing; but for Henry they did not exist.
Strange things were happening to him. And, lying awake that night in
bed, he recognized the truth. He was in love.

After that, for the remainder of his stay, they were always together.
They walked in the woods, they sat by the silvery lake. He poured out
the treasures of his learning for her, and she looked at him with
reverent eyes, uttering from time to time a soft 'Yes' or a musical
'Gee!'

In due season Henry went back to New York.

'You're dead wrong about love, Mills,' said his sentimental
fellow-cashier, shortly after his return. 'You ought to get married.'

'I'm going to,' replied Henry, briskly. 'Week tomorrow.'

Which stunned the other so thoroughly that he gave a customer who
entered at that moment fifteen dollars for a ten-dollar cheque, and had
to do some excited telephoning after the bank had closed.

Henry's first year as a married man was the happiest of his life. He
had always heard this period described as the most perilous of
matrimony. He had braced himself for clashings of tastes, painful
adjustments of character, sudden and unavoidable quarrels. Nothing of
the kind happened. From the very beginning they settled down in perfect
harmony. She merged with his life as smoothly as one river joins
another. He did not even have to alter his habits. Every morning he had
his breakfast at eight, smoked a cigarette, and walked to the
Underground. At five he left the bank, and at six he arrived home, for
it was his practice to walk the first two miles of the way, breathing
deeply and regularly. Then dinner. Then the quiet evening. Sometimes
the moving-pictures, but generally the quiet evening, he reading the
_Encyclopaedia_--aloud now--Minnie darning his socks, but never
ceasing to listen.

Each day brought the same sense of grateful amazement that he should be
so wonderfully happy, so extraordinarily peaceful. Everything was as
perfect as it could be. Minnie was looking a different girl. She had
lost her drawn look. She was filling out.

Sometimes he would suspend his reading for a moment, and look across at
her. At first he would see only her soft hair, as she bent over her
sewing. Then, wondering at the silence, she would look up, and he would
meet her big eyes. And then Henry would gurgle with happiness, and
demand of himself, silently:

'Can you beat it!'

It was the anniversary of their wedding. They celebrated it in fitting
style. They dined at a crowded and exhilarating Italian restaurant on a
street off Seventh Avenue, where red wine was included in the bill, and
excitable people, probably extremely clever, sat round at small tables
and talked all together at the top of their voices. After dinner they
saw a musical comedy. And then--the great event of the night--they
went on to supper at a glittering restaurant near Times Square.

There was something about supper at an expensive restaurant which had
always appealed to Henry's imagination. Earnest devourer as he was of
the solids of literature, he had tasted from time to time its lighter
face--those novels which begin with the hero supping in the midst of
the glittering throng and having his attention attracted to a
distinguished-looking elderly man with a grey imperial who is entering
with a girl so strikingly beautiful that the revellers turn, as she
passes, to look after her. And then, as he sits and smokes, a waiter
comes up to the hero and, with a soft '_Pardon, m'sieu!_' hands
him a note.

The atmosphere of Geisenheimer's suggested all that sort of thing to
Henry. They had finished supper, and he was smoking a cigar--his second
that day. He leaned back in his chair and surveyed the scene. He felt
braced up, adventurous. He had that feeling, which comes to all quiet
men who like to sit at home and read, that this was the sort of
atmosphere in which he really belonged. The brightness of it all--the
dazzling lights, the music, the hubbub, in which the deep-throated
gurgle of the wine-agent surprised while drinking soup blended with the
shriller note of the chorus-girl calling to her mate--these things got
Henry. He was thirty-six next birthday, but he felt a youngish
twenty-one.

A voice spoke at his side. Henry looked up, to perceive Sidney Mercer.

The passage of a year, which had turned Henry into a married man, had
turned Sidney Mercer into something so magnificent that the spectacle
for a moment deprived Henry of speech. Faultless evening dress clung
with loving closeness to Sidney's lissom form. Gleaming shoes of
perfect patent leather covered his feet. His light hair was brushed
back into a smooth sleekness on which the electric lights shone like
stars on some beautiful pool. His practically chinless face beamed
amiably over a spotless collar.

Henry wore blue serge.

'What are you doing here, Henry, old top?' said the vision. 'I didn't
know you ever came among the bright lights.'

His eyes wandered off to Minnie. There was admiration in them, for
Minnie was looking her prettiest.

'Wife,' said Henry, recovering speech. And to Minnie: 'Mr Mercer. Old
friend.'

'So you're married? Wish you luck. How's the bank?'

Henry said the bank was doing as well as could be expected.

'You still on the stage?'

Mr Mercer shook his head importantly.

'Got better job. Professional dancer at this show. Rolling in money.
Why aren't you dancing?'

The words struck a jarring note. The lights and the music until that
moment had had a subtle psychological effect on Henry, enabling him to
hypnotize himself into a feeling that it was not inability to dance
that kept him in his seat, but that he had had so much of that sort of
thing that he really preferred to sit quietly and look on for a change.
Sidney's question changed all that. It made him face the truth.

'I don't dance.'

'For the love of Mike! I bet Mrs Mills does. Would you care for a turn,
Mrs Mills?'

'No, thank you, really.'

But remorse was now at work on Henry. He perceived that he had been
standing in the way of Minnie's pleasure. Of course she wanted to
dance. All women did. She was only refusing for his sake.

'Nonsense, Min. Go to it.'

Minnie looked doubtful.

'Of course you must dance, Min. I shall be all right. I'll sit here and
smoke.'

The next moment Minnie and Sidney were treading the complicated
measure; and simultaneously Henry ceased to be a youngish twenty-one
and was even conscious of a fleeting doubt as to whether he was really
only thirty-five.

Boil the whole question of old age down, and what it amounts to is that
a man is young as long as he can dance without getting lumbago, and, if
he cannot dance, he is never young at all. This was the truth that
forced itself upon Henry Wallace Mills, as he sat watching his wife
moving over the floor in the arms of Sidney Mercer. Even he could see
that Minnie danced well. He thrilled at the sight of her gracefulness;
and for the first time since his marriage he became introspective. It
had never struck him before how much younger Minnie was than himself.
When she had signed the paper at the City Hall on the occasion of the
purchase of the marriage licence, she had given her age, he remembered
now, as twenty-six. It had made no impression on him at the time. Now,
however, he perceived clearly that between twenty-six and thirty-five
there was a gap of nine years; and a chill sensation came upon him of
being old and stodgy. How dull it must be for poor little Minnie to be
cooped up night after night with such an old fogy? Other men took their
wives out and gave them a good time, dancing half the night with them.
All he could do was to sit at home and read Minnie dull stuff from the
_Encyclopaedia_. What a life for the poor child! Suddenly, he felt
acutely jealous of the rubber-jointed Sidney Mercer, a man whom
hitherto he had always heartily despised.

The music stopped. They came back to the table, Minnie with a pink glow
on her face that made her younger than ever; Sidney, the insufferable
ass, grinning and smirking and pretending to be eighteen. They looked
like a couple of children--Henry, catching sight of himself in a
mirror, was surprised to find that his hair was not white.

Half an hour later, in the cab going home, Minnie, half asleep, was
aroused by a sudden stiffening of the arm that encircled her waist and
a sudden snort close to her ear.

It was Henry Wallace Mills resolving that he would learn to dance.

Being of a literary turn of mind and also economical, Henry's first
step towards his new ambition was to buy a fifty-cent book entitled
_The ABC of Modern Dancing_, by 'Tango'. It would, he felt--not
without reason--be simpler and less expensive if he should learn the
steps by the aid of this treatise than by the more customary method of
taking lessons. But quite early in the proceedings he was faced by
complications. In the first place, it was his intention to keep what he
was doing a secret from Minnie, in order to be able to give her a
pleasant surprise on her birthday, which would be coming round in a few
weeks. In the second place, _The ABC of Modern Dancing_ proved on
investigation far more complex than its title suggested.

These two facts were the ruin of the literary method, for, while it was
possible to study the text and the plates at the bank, the home was the
only place in which he could attempt to put the instructions into
practice. You cannot move the right foot along dotted line A B and
bring the left foot round curve C D in a paying-cashier's cage in a
bank, nor, if you are at all sensitive to public opinion, on the
pavement going home. And while he was trying to do it in the parlour of
the flat one night when he imagined that Minnie was in the kitchen
cooking supper, she came in unexpectedly to ask how he wanted the steak
cooked. He explained that he had had a sudden touch of cramp, but the
incident shook his nerve.

After this he decided that he must have lessons.

Complications did not cease with this resolve. Indeed, they became more
acute. It was not that there was any difficulty about finding an
instructor. The papers were full of their advertisements. He selected a
Mme Gavarni because she lived in a convenient spot. Her house was in a
side street, with a station within easy reach. The real problem was
when to find time for the lessons. His life was run on such a regular
schedule that he could hardly alter so important a moment in it as the
hour of his arrival home without exciting comment. Only deceit could
provide a solution.

'Min, dear,' he said at breakfast.

'Yes, Henry?'

Henry turned mauve. He had never lied to her before.

'I'm not getting enough exercise.'

'Why you look so well.'

'I get a kind of heavy feeling sometimes. I think I'll put on another
mile or so to my walk on my way home. So--so I'll be back a little
later in future.'

'Very well, dear.'

It made him feel like a particularly low type of criminal, but, by
abandoning his walk, he was now in a position to devote an hour a day
to the lessons; and Mme Gavarni had said that that would be ample.

'Sure, Bill,' she had said. She was a breezy old lady with a military
moustache and an unconventional manner with her clientele. 'You come to
me an hour a day, and, if you haven't two left feet, we'll make you the
pet of society in a month.'

'Is that so?'

'It sure is. I never had a failure yet with a pupe, except one. And
that wasn't my fault.'

'Had he two left feet?'

'Hadn't any feet at all. Fell off of a roof after the second lesson,
and had to have 'em cut off him. At that, I could have learned him to
tango with wooden legs, only he got kind of discouraged. Well, see you
Monday, Bill. Be good.'

And the kindly old soul, retrieving her chewing gum from the panel of
the door where she had placed it to facilitate conversation, dismissed
him.

And now began what, in later years, Henry unhesitatingly considered the
most miserable period of his existence. There may be times when a man
who is past his first youth feels more unhappy and ridiculous than when
he is taking a course of lessons in the modern dance, but it is not
easy to think of them. Physically, his new experience caused Henry
acute pain. Muscles whose existence he had never suspected came into
being for--apparently--the sole purpose of aching. Mentally he suffered
even more.

This was partly due to the peculiar method of instruction in vogue at
Mme Gavarni's, and partly to the fact that, when it came to the actual
lessons, a sudden niece was produced from a back room to give them. She
was a blonde young lady with laughing blue eyes, and Henry never
clasped her trim waist without feeling a black-hearted traitor to his
absent Minnie. Conscience racked him. Add to this the sensation of
being a strange, jointless creature with abnormally large hands and
feet, and the fact that it was Mme Gavarni's custom to stand in a
corner of the room during the hour of tuition, chewing gum and making
comments, and it is not surprising that Henry became wan and thin.

Mme Gavarni had the trying habit of endeavouring to stimulate Henry by
frequently comparing his performance and progress with that of a
cripple whom she claimed to have taught at some previous time.

She and the niece would have spirited arguments in his presence as to
whether or not the cripple had one-stepped better after his third
lesson than Henry after his fifth. The niece said no. As well, perhaps,
but not better. Mme Gavarni said that the niece was forgetting the way
the cripple had slid his feet. The niece said yes, that was so, maybe
she was. Henry said nothing. He merely perspired.

He made progress slowly. This could not be blamed upon his
instructress, however. She did all that one woman could to speed him
up. Sometimes she would even pursue him into the street in order to
show him on the side-walk a means of doing away with some of his
numerous errors of _technique_, the elimination of which would
help to make him definitely the cripple's superior. The misery of
embracing her indoors was as nothing to the misery of embracing her on
the sidewalk.

Nevertheless, having paid for his course of lessons in advance, and
being a determined man, he did make progress. One day, to his surprise,
he found his feet going through the motions without any definite
exercise of will-power on his part--almost as if they were endowed with
an intelligence of their own. It was the turning-point. It filled him
with a singular pride such as he had not felt since his first rise of
salary at the bank.

Mme Gavarni was moved to dignified praise.

'Some speed, kid!' she observed. 'Some speed!'

Henry blushed modestly. It was the accolade.

Every day, as his skill at the dance became more manifest, Henry found
occasion to bless the moment when he had decided to take lessons. He
shuddered sometimes at the narrowness of his escape from disaster.
Every day now it became more apparent to him, as he watched Minnie,
that she was chafing at the monotony of her life. That fatal supper had
wrecked the peace of their little home. Or perhaps it had merely
precipitated the wreck. Sooner or later, he told himself, she was bound
to have wearied of the dullness of her lot. At any rate, dating from
shortly after that disturbing night, a lack of ease and spontaneity
seemed to creep into their relations. A blight settled on the home.

Little by little Minnie and he were growing almost formal towards each
other. She had lost her taste for being read to in the evenings and had
developed a habit of pleading a headache and going early to bed.
Sometimes, catching her eye when she was not expecting it, he surprised
an enigmatic look in it. It was a look, however, which he was able to
read. It meant that she was bored.

It might have been expected that this state of affairs would have
distressed Henry. It gave him, on the contrary, a pleasurable thrill.
It made him feel that it had been worth it, going through the torments
of learning to dance. The more bored she was now the greater her
delight when he revealed himself dramatically. If she had been
contented with the life which he could offer her as a non-dancer, what
was the sense of losing weight and money in order to learn the steps?
He enjoyed the silent, uneasy evenings which had supplanted those
cheery ones of the first year of their marriage. The more uncomfortable
they were now, the more they would appreciate their happiness later on.
Henry belonged to the large circle of human beings who consider that
there is acuter pleasure in being suddenly cured of toothache than in
never having toothache at all.

He merely chuckled inwardly, therefore, when, on the morning of her
birthday, having presented her with a purse which he knew she had long
coveted, he found himself thanked in a perfunctory and mechanical way.

'I'm glad you like it,' he said.

Minnie looked at the purse without enthusiasm.

'It's just what I wanted,' she said, listlessly.

'Well, I must be going. I'll get the tickets for the theatre while I'm
in town.'

Minnie hesitated for a moment.

'I don't believe I want to go to the theatre much tonight, Henry.'

'Nonsense. We must have a party on your birthday. We'll go to the
theatre and then we'll have supper at Geisenheimer's again. I may be
working after hours at the bank today, so I guess I won't come home.
I'll meet you at that Italian place at six.'

'Very well. You'll miss your walk, then?'

'Yes. It doesn't matter for once.'

'No. You're still going on with your walks, then?'

'Oh, yes, yes.'

'Three miles every day?'

'Never miss it. It keeps me well.'

'Yes.'

'Good-bye, darling.'

'Good-bye.'

Yes, there was a distinct chill in the atmosphere. Thank goodness,
thought Henry, as he walked to the station, it would be different
tomorrow morning. He had rather the feeling of a young knight who has
done perilous deeds in secret for his lady, and is about at last to
receive credit for them.

Geisenheimer's was as brilliant and noisy as it had been before when
Henry reached it that night, escorting a reluctant Minnie. After a
silent dinner and a theatrical performance during which neither had
exchanged more than a word between the acts, she had wished to abandon
the idea of supper and go home. But a squad of police could not have
kept Henry from Geisenheimer's. His hour had come. He had thought of
this moment for weeks, and he visualized every detail of his big scene.
At first they would sit at their table in silent discomfort. Then
Sidney Mercer would come up, as before, to ask Minnie to dance. And
then--then--Henry would rise and, abandoning all concealment, exclaim
grandly: 'No! I am going to dance with my wife!' Stunned amazement of
Minnie, followed by wild joy. Utter rout and discomfiture of that
pin-head, Mercer. And then, when they returned to their table, he
breathing easily and regularly as a trained dancer in perfect condition
should, she tottering a little with the sudden rapture of it all, they
would sit with their heads close together and start a new life. That
was the scenario which Henry had drafted.

It worked out--up to a certain point--as smoothly as ever it had done
in his dreams. The only hitch which he had feared--to wit, the
non-appearance of Sidney Mercer, did not occur. It would spoil the
scene a little, he had felt, if Sidney Mercer did not present himself
to play the role of foil; but he need have had no fears on this point.
Sidney had the gift, not uncommon in the chinless, smooth-baked type of
man, of being able to see a pretty girl come into the restaurant even
when his back was towards the door. They had hardly seated themselves
when he was beside their table bleating greetings.

'Why, Henry! Always here!'

'Wife's birthday.'

'Many happy returns of the day, Mrs Mills. We've just time for one turn
before the waiter comes with your order. Come along.'

The band was staggering into a fresh tune, a tune that Henry knew well.
Many a time had Mme Gavarni hammered it out of an aged and unwilling
piano in order that he might dance with her blue-eyed niece. He rose.

'No!' he exclaimed grandly. 'I am going to dance with my wife!'

He had not under-estimated the sensation which he had looked forward to
causing. Minnie looked at him with round eyes. Sidney Mercer was
obviously startled.

'I thought you couldn't dance.'

'You never can tell,' said Henry, lightly. 'It looks easy enough.
Anyway, I'll try.'

'Henry!' cried Minnie, as he clasped her.

He had supposed that she would say something like that, but hardly in
that kind of voice. There is a way of saying 'Henry!' which conveys
surprised admiration and remorseful devotion; but she had not said it
in that way. There had been a note of horror in her voice. Henry's was
a simple mind, and the obvious solution, that Minnie thought that he
had drunk too much red wine at the Italian restaurant, did not occur to
him.

He was, indeed, at the moment too busy to analyse vocal inflections.
They were on the floor now, and it was beginning to creep upon him like
a chill wind that the scenario which he had mapped out was subject to
unforeseen alterations.

At first all had been well. They had been almost alone on the floor,
and he had begun moving his feet along dotted line A B with the smooth
vim which had characterized the last few of his course of lessons. And
then, as if by magic, he was in the midst of a crowd--a mad, jigging
crowd that seemed to have no sense of direction, no ability whatever to
keep out of his way. For a moment the tuition of weeks stood by him.
Then, a shock, a stifled cry from Minnie, and the first collision had
occurred. And with that all the knowledge which he had so painfully
acquired passed from Henry's mind, leaving it an agitated blank. This
was a situation for which his slidings round an empty room had not
prepared him. Stage-fright at its worst came upon him. Somebody charged
him in the back and asked querulously where he thought he was going. As
he turned with a half-formed notion of apologizing, somebody else
rammed him from the other side. He had a momentary feeling as if he
were going down the Niagara Rapids in a barrel, and then he was lying
on the floor with Minnie on top of him. Somebody tripped over his head.

He sat up. Somebody helped him to his feet. He was aware of Sidney
Mercer at his side.

'Do it again,' said Sidney, all grin and sleek immaculateness. 'It went
down big, but lots of them didn't see it.'

The place was full of demon laughter.

       *      *      *      *      *

'Min!' said Henry.

They were in the parlour of their little flat. Her back was towards
him, and he could not see her face. She did not answer. She preserved
the silence which she had maintained since they had left the
restaurant. Not once during the journey home had she spoken.

The clock on the mantelpiece ticked on. Outside an Elevated train
rumbled by. Voices came from the street.

'Min, I'm sorry.'

Silence.

'I thought I could do it. Oh, Lord!' Misery was in every note of
Henry's voice. 'I've been taking lessons every day since that night we
went to that place first. It's no good--I guess it's like the old woman
said. I've got two left feet, and it's no use my ever trying to do it.
I kept it secret from you, what I was doing. I wanted it to be a
wonderful surprise for you on your birthday. I knew how sick and tired
you were getting of being married to a man who never took you out,
because he couldn't dance. I thought it was up to me to learn, and give
you a good time, like other men's wives. I--'

'Henry!'

She had turned, and with a dull amazement he saw that her whole face
had altered. Her eyes were shining with a radiant happiness.

'Henry! Was _that_ why you went to that house--to take dancing
lessons?'

He stared at her without speaking. She came to him, laughing.

'So that was why you pretended you were still doing your walks?'

'You knew!'

'I saw you come out of that house. I was just going to the station at
the end of the street, and I saw you. There was a girl with you, a girl
with yellow hair. You hugged her!'

Henry licked his dry lips.

'Min,' he said huskily. 'You won't believe it, but she was trying to
teach me the Jelly Roll.'

She held him by the lapels of his coat.

'Of course I believe it. I understand it all now. I thought at the time
that you were just saying good-bye to her! Oh, Henry, why ever didn't
you tell me what you were doing? Oh, yes, I know you wanted it to be a
surprise for me on my birthday, but you must have seen there was
something wrong. You must have seen that I thought something. Surely
you noticed how I've been these last weeks?'

'I thought it was just that you were finding it dull.'

'Dull! Here, with you!'

'It was after you danced that night with Sidney Mercer. I thought the
whole thing out. You're so much younger than I, Min. It didn't seem
right for you to have to spend your life being read to by a fellow like
me.'

'But I loved it!'

'You had to dance. Every girl has to. Women can't do without it.'

'This one can. Henry, listen! You remember how ill and worn out I was
when you met me first at that farm? Do you know why it was? It was
because I had been slaving away for years at one of those places where
you go in and pay five cents to dance with the lady instructresses. I
was a lady instructress. Henry! Just think what I went through! Every
day having to drag a million heavy men with large feet round a big
room. I tell you, you are a professional compared with some of them!
They trod on my feet and leaned their two hundred pounds on me and
nearly killed me. Now perhaps you can understand why I'm not crazy
about dancing! Believe me, Henry, the kindest thing you can do to me is
to tell me I must never dance again.'

'You--you--' he gulped. 'Do you really mean that you can--can stand the
sort of life we're living here? You really don't find it dull?'

'Dull!'

She ran to the bookshelf, and came back with a large volume.

'Read to me, Henry, dear. Read me something now. It seems ages and ages
since you used to. Read me something out of the _Encyclopaedia_!'

Henry was looking at the book in his hand. In the midst of a joy that
almost overwhelmed him, his orderly mind was conscious of something
wrong.

'But this is the MED-MUM volume, darling.'

'Is it? Well, that'll be all right. Read me all about "Mum".'

'But we're only in the CAL-CHA--' He wavered. 'Oh, well--I' he went on,
recklessly. 'I don't care. Do you?'

'No. Sit down here, dear, and I'll sit on the floor.'

Henry cleared his throat.

'"Milicz, or Militsch (d. 1374), Bohemian divine, was the most
influential among those preachers and writers in Moravia and Bohemia
who, during the fourteenth century, in a certain sense paved the way
for the reforming activity of Huss."'

He looked down. Minnie's soft hair was resting against his knee. He put
out a hand and stroked it. She turned and looked up, and he met her big
eyes.

'Can you beat it?' said Henry, silently, to himself.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Man with Two Left Feet, by P. G. Wodehouse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WITH TWO LEFT FEET ***

***** This file should be named 7471.txt or 7471.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/4/7/7471/

Produced by Suzanne L. Shell, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
